The Oval Portrait The chateau into which my valet had ventured to make forcible entrance , rather=than permit me , in my desperately wounded condition , to pass a night in the open-air , was one of those piles of commingled gloom and grandeur which have so long frowned among the Appennines , not less in fact than in the fancy of Mrs.=Radcliffe .
To all appearance it had been temporarily and very lately abandoned .
We established ourselves in one of the smallest and least sumptuously furnished apartments .
It lay in a remote turret of the building .
Its decorations were rich , yet tattered and antique .
Its walls were hung with tapestry and bedecked with manifold and multiform armorial trophies , together with an unusually great number of very spirited modern paintings in frames of rich golden arabesque .
In these paintings , which depended from the walls not only in their main surfaces , but in very many nooks which the bizarre architecture of the chateau rendered necessary -- in these paintings my incipient delirium , perhaps , had caused me to take deep interest ;
so that I bade Pedro to close the heavy shutters of the room -- since it was already night -- to light the tongues of a tall candelabrum which stood by the head of my bed -- and to throw open far=and=wide the fringed curtains of black velvet which enveloped the bed itself .
I wished all this done that I might resign myself , if=not to sleep , at=least alternately to the contemplation of these pictures , and the perusal of a small volume which had been found upon the pillow , and which purported to criticise and describe them .
Long -- long I read -- and devoutly , devotedly I gazed .
Rapidly and gloriously the hours flew by and the deep midnight came .
The position of the candelabrum displeased me , and outreaching my hand with difficulty , rather=than disturb my slumbering valet , I placed it so=as=to throw its rays more fully upon the book .
But the action produced an effect altogether unanticipated .
The rays of the numerous candles ( for there were many ) now fell within a niche of the room which had hitherto been thrown into deep shade by one of the bed-posts .
I thus saw in vivid light a picture all unnoticed before .
It was the portrait of a young girl just ripening into womanhood .
I glanced at the painting hurriedly , and then closed my eyes .
Why I did this was not at=first apparent even to my own perception .
But while my lids remained thus shut , I ran over in my mind my reason for so shutting them .
It was an impulsive movement to gain time for thought -- to make sure that my vision had not deceived me -- to calm and subdue my fancy for a more sober and more certain gaze .
In a very few moments I again looked fixedly at the painting .
That I now saw aright I could not and would not doubt ;
for the first flashing of the candles upon that canvas had seemed to dissipate the dreamy stupor which was stealing over my senses , and to startle me at once into waking life .
The portrait , I have already said , was that of a young girl .
It was a mere head and shoulders , done in what is technically termed a vignette manner ;
much in the style of the favorite heads of Sully .
The arms , the bosom , and even the ends of the radiant hair melted imperceptibly into the vague yet deep shadow which formed the back-ground of the whole .
The frame was oval , richly gilded and filigreed in Moresque .
As a thing of art nothing could be more admirable than the painting itself .
But it could have been neither the execution of the work , nor the immortal beauty of the countenance , which had so suddenly and so vehemently moved me .
Least=of=all , could it have been that my fancy , shaken from its half slumber , had mistaken the head for that of a living person .
I saw at once that the peculiarities of the design , of the vignetting , and of the frame , must have instantly dispelled such idea -- must have prevented even its momentary entertainment .
Thinking earnestly upon these points , I remained , for an hour perhaps , half sitting , half reclining , with my vision riveted upon the portrait .
At=length , satisfied with the true secret of its effect , I fell back within the bed .
I had found the spell of the picture in an absolute life-likeliness of expression , which , at first startling , finally confounded , subdued , and appalled me .
With deep and reverent awe I replaced the candelabrum in its former position .
The cause of my deep agitation being thus shut from view , I sought eagerly the volume which discussed the paintings and their histories .
Turning to the number which designated the oval portrait , I there read the vague and quaint words which follow :
" She was a maiden of rarest beauty , and not more lovely than full of glee .
And evil was the hour when she saw , and loved , and wedded the painter .
He , passionate , studious , austere , and having already a bride in his Art ;
she a maiden of rarest beauty , and not more lovely than full of glee ;
all light and smiles , and frolicsome as the young fawn ; loving and cherishing all things ; hating only the Art which was her rival ; dreading only the pallet and brushes and other untoward instruments which deprived her of the countenance of her lover .
It was thus a terrible thing for this lady to hear the painter speak of his desire to portray even his young bride .
But she was humble and obedient , and sat meekly for many weeks in the dark , high turret-chamber where the light dripped upon the pale canvas only from overhead .
But he , the painter , took glory in his work , which went on from hour to hour , and from day to day .
And he was a passionate , and wild , and moody man , who became lost in reveries ;
so=that he would not see that the light which fell so ghastly in that lone turret withered the health and the spirits of his bride , who pined visibly to all=but him .
Yet she smiled on and still on , uncomplainingly , because she saw that the painter ( who had high renown ) took a fervid and burning pleasure in his task , and wrought day and night to depict her who so loved him , yet who grew daily more dispirited and weak .
And in sooth some who beheld the portrait spoke of its resemblance in low words , as=of a mighty marvel , and a proof not less of the power of the painter than of his deep love for her whom he depicted so surpassingly well .
But at=length , as the labor drew nearer to its conclusion , there were admitted none into the turret ; for the painter had grown wild with the ardor of his work , and turned his eyes from canvas merely , even to regard the countenance of his wife .
And he would not see that the tints which he spread upon the canvas were drawn from the cheeks of her who sate beside him .
And when many weeks bad passed , and but little remained to do , save one brush upon the mouth and one tint upon the eye , the spirit of the lady again flickered up as the flame within the socket of the lamp .
And then the brush was given , and then the tint was placed ;
and , for one moment , the painter stood entranced before the work which he had wrought ;
but in the next , while he yet gazed , he grew tremulous and very pallid , and aghast , and crying with a loud voice , « This is indeed Life itself ! » turned suddenly to regard his beloved : -- She was dead ! "
Ligeia And the will therein lieth , which dieth not .
Who knoweth the mysteries of the will , with its vigor ?
For=God is but a great will pervading all things by nature of its intentness . Man doth not yield himself to the
-- Joseph=Glanvill . I can_ _not , for my soul , remember how , when , or even precisely where , I first became acquainted with the lady Ligeia .
Long years have since elapsed , and my memory is feeble through much suffering . Or , perhaps , I
can_ _not now bring these points to mind , because , in truth , the character of my beloved , her rare learning , her singular yet placid cast of
beauty , and the thrilling and enthralling eloquence of her low musical language , made their way into my heart by paces so steadily and
I believe that I met her first and most frequently in some large , old ,
decaying city near the Rhine . Of her family -- I have surely heard her speak . That it is of a remotely ancient date can_ _not be doubted . Ligeia !
Ligeia !
in studies of a nature more=than all else adapted to deaden impressions of the outward world , it is by that sweet word alone -- by Ligeia -- that I bring before mine eyes in fancy the image of her who is no=more . And now , while I write , a recollection flashes upon me that
Was it a playful charge on the part of my Ligeia ?
or was it a test of my strength of affection , that I should institute no inquiries upon this point ?
or was it rather a caprice of my own -- a wildly romantic offering on the shrine of the most passionate devotion ?
I but indistinctly recall the fact itself -- what wonder that I have
utterly forgotten the circumstances which originated or attended it ? And , indeed , if ever she , the wan and the misty-winged Ashtophet of idolatrous Egypt , presided , as they tell , over marriages ill-omened , then most surely she presided over mine .
There is one dear topic , however , on which my memory falls me not .
It is the person of Ligeia .
In stature she was tall , somewhat slender , and , in
her latter days , even emaciated . I would in vain attempt to portray the majesty , the quiet ease , of her demeanor , or the incomprehensible lightness and elasticity of her footfall .
She came and departed as a shadow .
I was never made aware of her entrance into my closed study save by the dear music of her low sweet voice , as she placed her marble hand upon my shoulder .
In beauty of face no maiden ever equalled her .
It was the radiance of an opium-dream -- an airy and spirit-lifting vision more wildly divine than the phantasies which hovered vision about the slumbering souls of the daughters of Delos .
Yet her features were not of that regular mould which we have been falsely taught to worship in the classical labors of the heathen .
« There is no exquisite beauty , » says Bacon , Lord=Verulam , speaking truly of all the forms and genera of beauty , « without some strangeness in the proportion . »
Yet , although I saw that the features of Ligeia were not of a classic regularity -- although I perceived that her loveliness was indeed « exquisite , » and felt that
there was much of « strangeness » pervading it , yet I have tried in vain to detect the irregularity and to trace home my own perception of " the
-- the skin rivalling the purest ivory , the commanding extent and repose , the gentle prominence of the regions above the temples ;
and then the raven-black , the glossy , the luxuriant and naturally-curling tresses , setting forth the full force of the Homeric epithet ,
There were the same luxurious smoothness of surface , the same scarcely perceptible tendency to the aquiline , the same harmoniously curved nostrils speaking the free spirit .
I regarded the sweet mouth .
Here was indeed the triumph of all things heavenly -- the magnificent turn of the short upper lip -- the soft , voluptuous slumber of the under -- the dimples which sported , and the color which spoke -- the
teeth glancing back , with a brilliancy almost startling , every ray of the holy light which fell upon them in her serene and placid , yet most exultingly radiant of all smiles . I scrutinized the formation of the chin -- and here , too , I found the gentleness of breadth , the softness
And then I peered into the large eyes of Ligeia .
For eyes we have no models in the remotely antique .
It might have been , too , that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret to which Lord Verulam alludes .
They were , I must believe , far larger than the ordinary eyes of our own race .
They were even fuller than the fullest of the gazelle eyes of the tribe of the valley of Nourjahad .
Yet it was only at intervals -- in moments of intense excitement -- that this peculiarity became more=than slightly noticeable in Ligeia .
And at such moments was her beauty -- in my heated fancy thus it appeared perhaps -- the beauty of beings either above or apart=from the earth -- the beauty of the fabulous Houri of the Turk .
The hue of the orbs was the most brilliant of black , and , far over them , hung jetty lashes of great length . The brows ,
slightly irregular in outline , had the same tint . The « strangeness , »
however , which I found in the eyes , was of a nature distinct from the formation , or the color , or the brilliancy of the features , and must , after all , be referred to the expression . Ah , word of no meaning !
behind whose vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our ignorance of so much of the spiritual .
The expression of the eyes of Ligeia !
How for long hours have I pondered upon it !
How have I , through the whole of a midsummer night , struggled to fathom it !
What was it -- that something more profound than the well of Democritus -- which lay far within the pupils of my beloved ?
What was it ?
I was possessed with a passion to
discover . Those eyes ! those large , those shining , those divine orbs !
There is no point , among the many incomprehensible anomalies of the science of mind , more thrillingly exciting than the fact -- never , I believe , noticed in the schools -- that , in our endeavors to recall to memory something long-forgotten , we often find ourselves upon the very verge of remembrance , without being able , in the end , to remember .
And thus how frequently , in my intense scrutiny of Ligeia's eyes , have I felt approaching the full knowledge of their expression -- felt it approaching -- yet not=quite be mine -- and so at=length entirely depart !
And ( strange , oh strangest mystery of all !
) I found , in the commonest objects of the universe , a circle of analogies to that expression .
I mean to say that , subsequently to the period when Ligeia's beauty passed into my spirit , there dwelling as=in a shrine , I derived , from many existences in the material world , a sentiment such=as I felt always aroused within me by her large and luminous orbs .
Yet not the more could I define that sentiment , or analyze , or even steadily view it .
I recognized it , let me repeat , sometimes in the survey of a rapidly-growing vine -- in the contemplation of a moth , a butterfly , a chrysalis , a stream of running water . I have felt it in the ocean ; in the falling of a meteor .
I have felt it in the glances of unusually aged people .
And there are one or two stars in heaven -- ( one especially , a
star of the sixth magnitude , double and changeable , to be found near the large star in Lyra ) in a telescopic scrutiny of which I have been made aware of the feeling . I have been filled with it by certain sounds from
innumerable other instances , I well remember something in a volume of Joseph=Glanvill , which ( perhaps merely from its quaintness -- who shall
say ? ) never failed to inspire me with the sentiment ; -- " And the will therein lieth , which dieth not .
Who knoweth the mysteries of the will , with its vigor ? For=God is but a great will pervading all things by nature of its intentness .
Man doth not yield him to the angels , nor unto death utterly , save only through the weakness of his feeble will .
" Length of years , and subsequent reflection , have enabled me to trace ,
indeed , some remote connection between this passage in the English moralist and a portion of the character of Ligeia .
An intensity in thought , action , or speech , was possibly , in her , a result , or at=least an index , of that gigantic volition which , during our long intercourse , failed to give other and more immediate evidence of its existence .
Of all the women whom I have ever known , she , the outwardly calm , the ever-placid Ligeia , was the most violently a prey to the tumultuous vultures of stern passion .
And of such passion I could form no estimate , save by the miraculous expansion of those eyes which at=once so delighted and appalled me -- by the almost magical melody , modulation , distinctness and placidity of her very low voice -- and by the fierce energy ( rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner of utterance ) of the wild words which she habitually uttered .
I have spoken of the learning of Ligeia : it was immense -- such=as I
have never known in woman .
In the classical tongues was she deeply
knowledge was such=as I have never known in woman -- but where breathes the man who has traversed , and successfully , all the wide areas of moral , physical , and mathematical science ?
How poignant , then , must have been the grief with which , after some years , I beheld my well-grounded expectations take wings to themselves and fly away !
Without=Ligeia=I was but as a child groping benighted .
Her presence , her readings alone , rendered vividly luminous the many mysteries of the transcendentalism in which we were immersed .
Wanting the radiant lustre of her eyes , letters , lambent and golden , grew duller than Saturnian lead .
And now those eyes shone less and less frequently upon the pages over which I pored .
Ligeia grew ill .
The wild eyes blazed with a too -- too glorious effulgence ;
the pale fingers became of the transparent waxen hue of the grave , and the blue veins upon the lofty forehead swelled and sank impetuously with the tides of the gentle
emotion . I saw that she must die -- and I struggled desperately in spirit with the grim Azrael .
And the struggles of the passionate wife were , to my astonishment , even more energetic than my own .
There had been much in her stern nature to impress me with the belief that , to her , death would have come without its terrors ;
-- but not so .
Words are impotent to convey any just idea of the fierceness of resistance with which she wrestled with the Shadow .
I groaned in anguish at the pitiable spectacle .
I would have soothed -- I would have reasoned ;
but , in the intensity of her wild desire for life , -- for life -- but=for life -- solace and reason were the uttermost folly .
Yet not=until the last instance , amid the most convulsive writhings of her fierce spirit , was shaken the external placidity of her demeanor .
Her voice grew more gentle -- grew more low -- yet I would not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning of the quietly
uttered words . My brain reeled as I hearkened entranced , to a melody more=than mortal -- to assumptions and aspirations which mortality had never before known .
That she loved me I should not have doubted ;
and I might have been easily aware that , in a bosom such=as hers , love would have reigned
no ordinary passion . But in death only , was I fully impressed with the
strength of her affection . For long hours , detaining my hand , would she pour out before me the overflowing of a heart whose more=than passionate devotion amounted to idolatry .
How had I deserved to be so blessed by such confessions ?
-- how had I deserved to be so cursed with the removal
of my beloved in the hour of her making them , But upon this subject
I can_ _not bear to dilate . Let me say only , that in Ligeia's more=than womanly abandonment to a love , alas ! all unmerited , all unworthily bestowed , I at=length recognized the principle of her longing with so wildly earnest a desire for the life which was now fleeing so rapidly
away . It is this wild longing -- it is this eager vehemence of desire
for life -- but=for life -- that I have no power to portray -- no utterance
capable of expressing .
At high noon of the night in which she departed , beckoning me ,
_t_ _is a gala night Within the lonesome latter years !
An angel throng , bewinged , bedight In veils , and drowned in tears ,
Sit in a theatre , to see A play of hopes and fears , While the orchestra breathes fitfully
The music of the spheres .
Mimes , in=the=form=of God on high ,
Mutter and mumble low , And hither and thither fly ; Mere puppets they , who come and go At bidding of vast formless things That shift the scenery to=and=fro ,
Flapping from out their Condor wings Invisible Wo ! That motley drama ! -- oh , be sure It shall not be forgot ! With its Phantom chased forever more , By a crowd that seize it not , Through a circle that ever returneth in To the self-same spot , And much of Madness and more of Sin And Horror the soul of the plot .
But see , amid the mimic rout ,
A crawling shape intrude !
A blood-red thing that writhes from out The scenic solitude !
It writhes !
-- it writhes ! -- with mortal pangs
The mimes become its food , And the seraphs sob at vermin fangs
In human gore imbued .
Out -- out are the lights -- out all ! And over each quivering form , The curtain , a funeral pall ,
Comes down with the rush of a storm , And the angels , all pallid and wan ,
Uprising , unveiling , affirm That the play is the tragedy , « Man , »
And its hero the Conqueror=Worm .
« O God ! » half shrieked Ligeia , leaping to her feet and extending her arms aloft with a spasmodic movement , as I made an end of these
lines -- " O God !
O Divine=Father ! -- shall these things be undeviatingly so ?
-- shall this Conqueror be not once conquered ?
Are we not part and parcel in Thee ?
Who -- who knoweth the mysteries of the will with its vigor ?
Man doth not yield him to the angels , nor unto death utterly , save only through the weakness of his feeble will .
" And now , as=if exhausted with emotion , she suffered her white arms to
fall , and returned solemnly to her bed of death . And as she breathed her last sighs , there came mingled with them a low murmur from her lips .
I bent to them my ear and distinguished , again , the concluding words of
the passage in Glanvill -- " Man doth not yield him to the angels , nor unto death utterly , save only through the weakness of his feeble will .
" She died ;
-- and I , crushed into the very dust with sorrow , could no longer endure the lonely desolation of my dwelling in the dim and decaying city by the Rhine .
I had no lack of what the world calls wealth .
Ligeia had brought me far more , very far more=than ordinarily falls to the lot of mortals . After a=few months , therefore , of weary and
aimless wandering , I purchased , and put in some repair , an abbey , which I shall not name , in one of the wildest and least frequented portions of
Yet although the external abbey , with its verdant decay hanging about it , suffered but little alteration , I gave way , with a child-like perversity , and perchance with a faint hope of alleviating my sorrows , to a display of more=than regal magnificence within .
-- For such follies , even in childhood , I had imbibed a taste and now they came back to me as=if in the dotage of grief . Alas , I feel how much even
I had become a bounden slave in the trammels of opium , and my labors and my orders had taken a coloring from my dreams .
But these absurdities must not pause to detail .
There is no individual portion of the architecture and decoration of that bridal chamber which is not now visibly before me . Where were the
souls of the haughty family of the bride , when , through thirst of gold , they permitted to pass the threshold of an apartment so bedecked , a maiden and a daughter so beloved ?
I have said that I minutely remember the details of the chamber -- yet I am sadly forgetful on topics of deep moment -- and here there was no system , no keeping , in the fantastic
display , to take hold upon the memory .
The room lay in a high turret of
the castellated abbey , was pentagonal in shape , and of capacious size .
Occupying the whole southern face of the pentagon was the sole window -- an immense sheet of unbroken glass from Venice -- a single pane , and tinted of a leaden hue , so=that the rays of either the sun or moon ,
passing through it , fell with a ghastly lustre on the objects within . Over the upper portion of this huge window , extended the trellice-work
of an aged vine , which clambered up the massy walls of the turret . The ceiling , of gloomy-looking oak , was excessively lofty , vaulted , and elaborately fretted with the wildest and most grotesque specimens of a semi-Gothic , semi-Druidical device . From out the most central recess of
this melancholy vaulting , depended , by a single chain of gold with long links , a huge censer of the same metal , Saracenic in pattern , and with many perforations so contrived that there writhed in=and=out of them , as=if endued with a serpent vitality , a continual succession of parti-colored fires . Some few ottomans and golden candelabra , of Eastern figure , were in
various stations about -- and there was the couch , too -- bridal couch -- of
an Indian model , and low , and sculptured of solid ebony , with a pall-like canopy above . In each of the angles of the chamber stood on
The lofty walls , gigantic in height -- even unproportionably so -- were hung from summit to foot , in vast folds , with a heavy and
The material was the richest
cloth of gold . It was spotted all-over , at irregular intervals , with arabesque figures , about a foot in diameter , and wrought upon the cloth
in patterns of the most jetty black . But these figures partook of the
true character of the arabesque only when regarded from a single point of view . By a contrivance now common , and indeed traceable to a very
remote period of antiquity , they were made changeable in aspect . To one entering the room , they bore the appearance of simple monstrosities ; but upon a farther advance , this appearance gradually departed ; and step by step , as the visitor moved his station in the chamber , he saw himself surrounded by an endless succession of the ghastly forms which belong to the superstition of the Norman , or arise in the guilty slumbers of the
monk . The phantasmagoric effect was vastly heightened by the artificial introduction of a strong continual current of wind behind the
draperies -- giving a hideous and uneasy animation to the whole . In halls such=as these -- in a bridal chamber such=as this -- I passed , with the Lady=of=Tremaine , the unhallowed hours of the first month of our
marriage -- passed them with but little disquietude . That my wife dreaded the fierce moodiness of my temper -- that she shunned me and loved me but little -- I could not help perceiving ;
but it gave me rather pleasure than otherwise .
I loathed her with a hatred belonging more to demon than to man .
My memory flew back , ( oh , with what intensity of regret ! ) to
Ligeia , the beloved , the august , the beautiful , the entombed .
I revelled in recollections of her purity , of her wisdom , of her lofty , her ethereal nature , of her passionate , her idolatrous love . Now , then , did
my spirit fully and freely burn with more=than all the fires of her own . In the excitement of my opium dreams ( for I was habitually fettered in
-- upon the earth .
About the commencement of the second month of the marriage , the Lady Rowena was attacked with sudden illness , from which her recovery was
slow . The fever which consumed her rendered her nights uneasy ;
and in her perturbed state of half-slumber , she spoke of sounds , and of motions , in and about the chamber of the turret , which I concluded had no origin save in the distemper of her fancy , or perhaps in the
phantasmagoric influences of the chamber itself . She became at=length
this attack her frame , at all times feeble , never altogether recovered .
Her illnesses were , after this epoch , of alarming character , and of more alarming recurrence , defying alike the knowledge and the great exertions of her physicians .
With the increase of the chronic disease which had thus , apparently , taken too sure hold upon her constitution to be eradicated by human means , I could not fall to observe a similar
increase in the nervous irritation of her temperament , and in her excitability by trivial causes of fear . She spoke again , and now more
One night , near the closing in of September , she pressed this distressing subject with more=than usual emphasis upon my attention . She had just awakened from an unquiet slumber , and I had been watching , with feelings half of anxiety , half of vague terror , the workings of her
emaciated countenance . I sat by the side of her ebony bed , upon one of
the ottomans of India . She partly arose , and spoke , in an earnest low whisper , of sounds which she then heard , but which I could not hear -- of motions which she then saw , but which I could not perceive .
The wind was rushing hurriedly behind the tapestries , and I wished to show her ( what , let me confess it , I could not all believe ) that those almost
inarticulate breathings , and those very gentle variations of the figures upon the wall , were but the natural effects of that customary rushing of the wind .
But a deadly pallor , overspreading her face , had proved to me that my exertions to reassure her would be fruitless . She appeared to be fainting , and no attendants were within call . I remembered where was deposited a decanter of light wine which had been ordered by her
physicians , and hastened across the chamber to procure it .
But , as I stepped beneath the light of the censer , two circumstances of a startling nature attracted my attention .
I had felt that some palpable although invisible object had passed lightly by my person ; and I saw that there lay upon the golden carpet , in the very middle of the rich lustre thrown from the censer , a shadow -- a faint , indefinite shadow of angelic aspect -- such=as might be fancied for the shadow of a shade .
But I was wild with the excitement of an immoderate dose of opium , and heeded these things but little , nor spoke of them to Rowena .
Having found the wine , I recrossed the chamber , and poured out a gobletful , which I held to the lips of the fainting lady .
She had now partially recovered , however , and took the vessel herself , while I sank upon an ottoman near me , with my eyes fastened upon her person .
It was then that I became distinctly aware of a gentle footfall upon the carpet , and
near the couch ; and in a second thereafter , as Rowena was in the act of raising the wine to her lips , I saw , or may have dreamed that I saw , fall within the goblet , as=if from some invisible spring in the atmosphere of the room , three or four large drops of a brilliant and
ruby colored fluid . If this I saw -- not so Rowena .
She swallowed the wine unhesitatingly , and I forbore to speak to her of a circumstance which must , after all , I considered , have been but the suggestion of a vivid imagination , rendered morbidly active by the terror of the lady , by the opium , and by the hour .
Yet I can_ _not conceal it from my own perception that , immediately subsequent to the fall of the ruby-drops , a rapid change for the worse took place in the disorder of my wife ;
so=that , on the third subsequent night , the hands of her menials prepared her for the tomb , and on the fourth , I sat alone , with her shrouded body , in that fantastic chamber which had received her as my bride .
-- Wild visions , opium-engendered , flitted , shadow-like , before me .
I gazed with unquiet eye upon the sarcophagi in the angles of the room , upon the varying figures of the drapery , and upon the writhing of the parti-colored fires in the censer
overhead . My eyes then fell , as I called to mind the circumstances of a former night , to the spot beneath the glare of the censer where I had seen the faint traces of the shadow .
It was there , however , no=longer ; and breathing with greater freedom , I turned my glances to the pallid and rigid figure upon the bed .
The night waned ; and still , with a bosom full of bitter thoughts of the one only and supremely beloved , I remained gazing upon the body of Rowena .
It might have been midnight , or perhaps earlier , or later , for I had taken no note of time , when a sob , low , gentle , but very distinct , startled me from my revery . -- I felt that it came from the bed of ebony -- the bed of death .
I listened in an agony of superstitious
terror -- but there was no repetition of the sound . I strained my vision
Yet I could not have been deceived .
I had heard the noise ,
however faint , and my soul was awakened within me . I resolutely and
perseveringly kept my attention riveted upon the body . Many minutes elapsed before any circumstance occurred tending to throw light upon the mystery . At=length it became evident that a slight , a very feeble , and
unutterable horror and awe , for which the language of mortality has no sufficiently energetic expression , I felt my heart cease to beat , my
limbs grow rigid where I sat . Yet a sense of duty finally operated to
necessary that some immediate exertion be made ; yet turret was altogether apart=from the portion of the abbey tenanted by the servants -- there were none within call -- I had no means of summoning them to my aid without leaving the room for many minutes -- and this I could
not venture to do . I therefore struggled alone in my endeavors to call
back the spirit ill hovering . In a short period it was certain , however ,
that a relapse had taken place ; the color disappeared from both eyelid and cheek , leaving a wanness even more=than that of marble ; the lips
became doubly shrivelled and pinched up in the ghastly expression of death ;
a repulsive clamminess and coldness overspread rapidly the surface of the body ; and all the usual rigorous illness immediately supervened .
I fell back with a shudder upon the couch from which I had
been so startlingly aroused , and again gave myself up=to passionate waking visions of Ligeia .
An hour thus elapsed when ( could it be possible ?
listened -- in extremity of horror .
The sound came again -- it was a sigh .
Rushing to the corpse , I saw -- distinctly saw -- a tremor upon the lips .
In a minute afterward they relaxed , disclosing a bright line of the pearly
teeth . Amazement now struggled in my bosom with the profound awe which had hitherto reigned there alone .
I felt that my vision grew dim , that my reason wandered ;
and it was only by a violent effort that I at=length succeeded in nerving myself to the task which duty thus once=more had
pointed out . There was now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the
cheek and throat ; a perceptible warmth pervaded the whole frame ; there
was even a slight pulsation at the heart .
The lady lived ;
and with redoubled ardor I betook myself to the task of restoration .
I chafed and bathed the temples and the hands , and used every exertion which experience , and no little medical reading , could suggest .
But in vain .
Suddenly , the color fled , the pulsation ceased , the lips resumed the expression of the dead , and , in an instant afterward , the whole body took upon itself the icy chilliness , the livid hue , the intense rigidity , the sunken outline , and all the loathsome peculiarities of that which has been , for many days , a tenant of the tomb .
And again I sunk into visions of Ligeia -- and again , ( what marvel that I
shudder while I write , ) again there reached my ears a low sob from the
region of the ebony bed . But why shall I minutely detail the unspeakable
horrors of that night ? Why shall I pause to relate how , time after time , until near the period of the gray dawn , this hideous drama of
revivification was repeated ; how each terrific relapse was only into a
sterner and apparently more irredeemable death ; how each agony wore the
aspect of a struggle with some invisible foe ; and how each struggle was succeeded by I know not what of wild change in the personal appearance of the corpse ?
Let me hurry to a conclusion .
I had long ceased to struggle or to move , and remained sitting rigidly upon the ottoman , a helpless prey to a whirl of violent emotions , of which extreme awe was perhaps the least terrible ,
the least consuming . The corpse , I repeat , stirred , and now more
But if this idea was not , even then , altogether adopted , I could at=least doubt no=longer , when , arising from the bed , tottering , with feeble steps , with closed eyes , and with the manner of one bewildered in
a dream , the thing that was enshrouded advanced boldly and palpably into the middle of the apartment . I trembled not -- I stirred not -- for a crowd of unutterable fancies connected with the air , the stature , the demeanor of the figure , rushing
hurriedly through my brain , had paralyzed -- had chilled me into stone . I stirred not -- but gazed upon the apparition .
There was a mad disorder in my thoughts -- a tumult unappeasable .
Could it , indeed , be the living Rowena who confronted me ?
Could it indeed be Rowena at=all -- the fair-haired , the blue-eyed Lady=Rowena=Trevanion=of=Tremaine ?
Why , why should I doubt it ?
The bandage lay heavily about the mouth -- but then might it not be the mouth of the breathing Lady=of=Tremaine ?
And the cheeks-there were the roses as=in her noon of life -- yes , these might indeed be the fair cheeks of the living Lady=of=Tremaine .
And the chin , with its dimples , as=in health , might it not be hers ?
-- but had she then grown taller since her malady ?
What inexpressible madness seized me with that thought ?
One bound , and I had reached her feet ! Shrinking from my
touch , she let fall from her head , unloosened , the ghastly cerements which had confined it , and there streamed forth , into the rushing atmosphere of the chamber , huge masses of long and dishevelled hair ; it was blacker than the raven wings of the midnight !
And now slowly opened the eyes of the figure which stood before me .
« Here then , at=least , » I shrieked aloud , " can I never -- can I never be mistaken -- these are the
full , and the black , and the wild eyes -- of my lost love -- of the lady -- of the Lady=ligeia .
" The Cask Of Amontillado . The thousand injuries of Fortunato=I had borne as I best could ;
but when he ventured upon insult , I vowed revenge .
You , who so well know the nature of my soul , will not suppose , however , that I gave utterance to a threat .
_At length_ I would be avenged ; this was a point definitively settled -- but the very definitiveness with which it was resolved , precluded the idea of risk .
I must not only punish , but punish with
impunity . A wrong is unredressed when retribution overtakes its
redresser . It is equally unredressed when the avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done the wrong .
It must be understood , that neither by word nor deed had I given Fortunato cause to doubt my good will .
I continued , as was my wont , to smile in his face , and he did not perceive that my smile _now_ was at the thought of his immolation .
He had a weak point -- this Fortunato -- although in other regards he was a man to be respected and even feared .
He prided himself on his connoisseurship in wine .
Few Italians have the true virtuoso spirit .
For=the=most=part their enthusiasm is adopted to suit the time and opportunity -- to practise imposture upon the British and Austrian
respect I did not differ from him materially : I was skilful in the
Italian vintages myself , and bought largely whenever I could .
It was about dusk , one evening during the supreme madness of the
carnival season , that I encountered my friend .
He accosted me with excessive warmth , for he had been drinking much .
The man wore motley . He
had on a tight-fitting parti-striped dress , and his head was surmounted by the conical cap and bells .
I was so pleased to see him , that I thought I should never have done wringing his hand .
I said to him -- " My dear Fortunato , you are luckily met .
How remarkably well you are looking to-day !
« How ? »
said he . " Amontillado ?
A pipe ?
Impossible !
And in the middle of the carnival !
" « I have my doubts , » I replied ; " and I was silly enough to pay the full
Amontillado price without consulting you in the matter . You were not to
be found , and I was fearful of losing a bargain . "
« Amontillado ! »
« I have my doubts . »
« Amontillado ! »
« And I must satisfy them . »
« Amontillado ! » " As you are engaged , I am on my way to Luchesi .
If any one has a critical turn , it is he .
He will tell me -- " « Luchesi can_ _not tell Amontillado from Sherry . »
" And yet some fools will have it that his taste is a match for your
own . "
« Come , let us go . »
« Whither ? »
« To your vaults . »
" My friend , no ;
I will not impose upon your good nature .
I perceive you have an engagement . Luchesi -- "
« I have no engagement ;
-- come . »
" My friend , no. It is not the engagement , but the severe cold with which I perceive you are afflicted .
The vaults are insufferably damp .
They are encrusted with nitre . "
" Let us go , nevertheless .
The cold is merely nothing .
Amontillado !
You have been imposed upon .
Thus speaking , Fortunato possessed himself of my arm. Putting on a mask
of black silk , and drawing a _roquelaire_ closely about my person , I suffered him to hurry me to my palazzo .
There were no attendants at-home ;
they had absconded to make merry in honor of the time .
I had told them that I should not return until the morning , and had given them explicit orders not to stir from the house .
These orders were sufficient , I well knew , to insure their immediate disappearance , one and all , as=soon=as my back was turned .
I took from their sconces two flambeaux , and giving one to Fortunato ,
bowed him through several suites of rooms to the archway that led into
the vaults . I passed down a long and winding staircase , requesting him to be cautious as he followed .
We came at=length to the foot of the descent , and stood together on the damp ground of the catacombs of the Montresors . The gait of my friend was unsteady , and the bells upon his cap jingled
as he strode .
« The pipe , » said he .
« It is farther on , » said I ; " but observe the white web-work which gleams from these cavern walls .
" He turned towards me , and looked into my eyes with two filmy orbs that distilled the rheum of intoxication .
« Nitre ? »
he asked , at=length .
« Nitre , » I replied . « How long have you had that cough ? »
" Ugh !
ugh !
ugh !
-- ugh !
ugh !
ugh !
-- ugh !
ugh !
ugh !
-- ugh !
ugh !
ugh !
-- ugh !
ugh !
ugh !
" My poor friend found it impossible to reply for many minutes .
« It is nothing , » he said , at=last .
« Come , » I said , with decision , " we will go back ;
your health is precious .
You are rich , respected , admired , beloved ;
you are happy , as once I was .
You are a man to be missed .
For me it is no=matter .
We will
go back ; you will be ill , and I can_ _not be responsible . Besides , there is
Luchesi -- "
« Enough , » he said ; " the cough is a mere nothing ;
it will not kill me . I
shall not die of a cough .
" « True -- true , » I replied ; " and , indeed , I had no intention of alarming
you unnecessarily -- but you should use all proper caution .
Here I knocked off the neck of a bottle which I drew from a long row of its fellows that lay upon the mould .
« Drink , » I said , presenting him the wine .
He raised it to his lips with a leer .
He paused and nodded to me familiarly , while his bells jingled .
« I drink , » he said , « to the buried that repose around us . »
« And I to your long-life . »
He again took my arm , and we proceeded .
« These vaults , » he said , « are extensive . »
« The Montresors , » I replied , « were a great and numerous family . »
« I forget your arms . »
" A huge human foot d'or , in a field azure ;
« And the motto ? »
" _Nemo me impune lacessit_ .
" « Good ! »
he said .
The wine sparkled in his eyes and the bells jingled .
My own fancy grew warm with the Medoc .
We had passed through walls of piled bones , with casks and puncheons intermingling , into the inmost recesses of the
catacombs . I paused again , and this time I made bold to seize Fortunato
by an arm above the elbow . « The nitre ! »
I said : " see , it increases . It hangs like moss upon the vaults .
We are below the river's bed .
The drops of moisture trickle among the bones .
Come , we will go back ere it is too late .
Your cough -- " « It is nothing , » he said ; " let us go on .
But first , another draught of the Medoc .
" I broke and reached him a flagon of De=Grave .
He emptied it at a breath .
His eyes flashed with a fierce light .
He laughed and threw the bottle upwards with a gesticulation I did not understand .
I looked at him in surprise .
He repeated the movement -- a grotesque one .
« You do not comprehend ? »
he said .
« Not I , » I replied .
« Then you are not of the brotherhood . »
« How ? »
« You are not of the masons . »
« Yes , yes , » I said , « yes , yes . »
« You ?
Impossible !
A mason ? »
« A mason , » I replied .
« A sign , » he said .
« It is this , » I answered , producing a trowel from beneath the folds of
my _roquelaire_ . « You jest , » he exclaimed , recoiling a=few paces . " But let us proceed to the Amontillado .
" « Be it so , » I said , replacing the tool beneath the cloak , and again
offering him my arm. He leaned upon it heavily .
We continued our route in search of the Amontillado .
At=the=most remote end of the crypt there appeared another less
sides of this interior crypt were still ornamented in this manner .
From the fourth the bones had been thrown down , and lay promiscuously upon the earth , forming at one point a mound of some size .
It seemed to have been constructed for no especial use in itself , but formed merely the interval between two of the colossal supports of the roof of the catacombs , and was backed by one of their
circumscribing walls of solid granite . It was in vain that Fortunato , uplifting his dull torch , endeavored to
pry into the depths of the recess . Its termination the feeble light did not enable us to see . « Proceed , » I said ;
« herein is the Amontillado .
As=for Luchesi -- » « He is an ignoramus , » interrupted my friend , as he stepped unsteadily forward , while I followed immediately at his heels .
In an instant he had reached the extremity of the niche , and finding his progress arrested
by the rock , stood stupidly bewildered . A moment more and I had fettered
him to the granite . In its surface were two iron staples , distant from each=other about two feet , horizontally .
From one of these depended a short chain , from the other a padlock .
Throwing the links about his waist , it was but the work of a=few seconds to secure it .
He was too much astounded to resist .
Withdrawing the key I stepped back from the recess .
« Pass your hand , » I said , " over the wall ;
you can_ _not help feeling the
nitre . Indeed it is _very_ damp .
Once=more let me _implore_ you to return .
No ?
Then I must positively leave you .
« The Amontillado ! »
ejaculated my friend , not=yet recovered from his
astonishment . « True , » I replied ;
« the Amontillado . » As I said these words I busied myself among the pile of bones of which I
have before spoken . Throwing them aside , I soon uncovered a quantity of
building stone and mortar . With these materials and with the aid of my trowel , I began vigorously to wall up the entrance of the niche .
I had scarcely laid the first tier of my masonry when I discovered that the intoxication of Fortunato had in a great measure worn off .
The earliest indication I had of this was a low moaning cry from the depth of the recess .
It was _not_ the cry of a drunken man .
There was then a long and obstinate silence .
I laid the second tier , and the third , and the fourth ;
and then I heard the furious vibrations of the chain .
The noise lasted for several minutes , during which , that I might hearken to it with the more satisfaction , I ceased my labors and sat down upon the
The wall was now nearly upon a level with my breast .
I again paused , and holding the flambeaux over the mason-work , threw a=few feeble rays upon the figure within .
A succession of loud and shrill screams , bursting suddenly from the throat of the chained form , seemed to thrust me violently back .
For a brief moment I hesitated -- I trembled .
Unsheathing my rapier , I began to
grope with it about the recess : but the thought of an instant reassured
I reapproached the wall .
I replied to the yells of him who clamored .
I re-echoed -- I aided -- I surpassed them in volume and in
strength . I did this , and the clamorer grew still .
It was now midnight , and my task was drawing to a close .
I had completed the eighth , the ninth , and the tenth tier .
I had finished a portion of the last and the eleventh ;
there remained but a single stone to be fitted and plastered in .
I struggled with its weight ;
I placed it partially in its destined position .
But now there came from out the niche a low laugh that erected the hairs upon my head .
It was succeeded by a sad voice , which I had difficulty in recognising as that of the
noble Fortunato .
The voice said -- " Ha ! ha !
ha !
-- he !
he !
-- a very good joke indeed -- an excellent jest .
We will have many a rich laugh about it at the palazzo -- he !
he !
he !
-- over
our wine -- he !
he !
he !
" « The Amontillado ! »
I said .
" He !
he !
he !
-- he !
he !
he !
-- yes , the Amontillado .
But is it not getting late ?
Will not they be awaiting us at the palazzo , the Lady=Fortunato and the rest ?
Let us be gone .
" « Yes , » I said , « let us be gone . »
" _For the love of God , Montressor !
_ " « Yes , » I said , « for the love of God ! »
But to these words I hearkened in vain for a reply .
I grew impatient .
I called aloud --
« Fortunato ! »
No answer . I called again --
« Fortunato ! »
No answer still . I thrust a torch through the remaining aperture and let it fall within .
There came forth in=return only a jingling of the bells .
hastened to make an end of my labor .
I forced the last stone into its position ;
I plastered it up . Against the new masonry I re-erected the old rampart of bones .
For the half of a century no mortal has disturbed them .
_In pace requiescat !
_ Some Words With A Mummy . The _symposium_ of the preceding evening had been a little too much for my nerves .
I had a wretched headache , and was desperately drowsy .
Instead=of going out therefore to spend the evening as I had proposed , it occurred to me that I could not do a wiser thing than just eat a
mouthful of supper and go immediately to bed .
A light supper of=course . I am exceedingly fond of Welsh rabbit .
More than a pound at=once , however , may not at all times be advisable .
Still , there can be no material objection to two .
And really between two and three , there is merely a single unit of difference .
I ventured , perhaps , upon four .
My wife will have it five ; -- but , clearly , she has confounded
two very distinct affairs . The abstract number , five , I am willing to
admit ; but , concretely , it has reference to bottles of Brown=Stout ,
without which , in the way of condiment , Welsh rabbit is to be eschewed .
Having thus concluded a frugal meal , and donned my night-cap , with the serene hope of enjoying it till noon the next day , I placed my head upon the pillow , and , through the aid of a capital conscience , fell into a
profound slumber forthwith . But when were the hopes of humanity fulfilled ?
I could not have
completed my third snore when there came a furious ringing at the
street-door bell , and then an impatient thumping at the knocker , which awakened me at=once .
In a minute afterward , and while I was still rubbing my eyes , my wife thrust in my face a note , from my old friend ,
Doctor Ponnonner . It ran thus : " Come to me , by all means , my dear good friend , as=soon=as you receive this .
Come and help us to rejoice .
At=last , by long persevering diplomacy , I have gained the assent of the Directors of the City=Museum , to my examination of the Mummy -- you know the one I mean .
I have permission to unswathe it and open it , if desirable .
A=few friends only will be present -- you , of=course .
The Mummy is now at my house , and we shall begin to unroll it at eleven to-night .
" Yours , ever , Ponnonner .
By the time I had reached the « Ponnonner , » it struck me that I was as wide awake as a man need be .
I leaped out=of bed in an ecstacy , overthrowing all in my way ; dressed myself with a rapidity truly marvellous ; and set off , at the top of my speed , for the doctor's .
There I found a very eager company assembled .
They had been awaiting me with much impatience ;
the Mummy was extended upon the dining-table ; and the moment I entered its examination was commenced .
It was one of a pair brought , several years previously , by Captain Arthur=Sabretash , a cousin of Ponnonner's from a tomb near Eleithias , in the Lybian mountains , a considerable distance above Thebes on the Nile .
The grottoes at this point , although less magnificent than the Theban sepulchres , are of higher interest , on=account=of affording more numerous illustrations of the private life of the Egyptians .
The chamber from which our specimen was taken , was said to be very rich in such illustrations ; the walls being completely covered with fresco paintings
and bas-reliefs , while statues , vases , and Mosaic work of rich patterns , indicated the vast wealth of the deceased . The treasure had been deposited in the Museum precisely in the same
condition in which Captain Sabretash had found it ; -- that is to say , the coffin had not been disturbed .
For eight years it had thus stood , subject only externally to public inspection .
We had now , therefore , the complete Mummy at our disposal ;
and to those who are aware how very rarely the unransacked antique reaches our shores , it will be evident , at=once that we had great reason to congratulate ourselves upon our good
fortune . Approaching the table , I saw on it a large box , or case , nearly seven feet long , and perhaps three feet wide , by two feet and a half deep .
It was oblong -- not coffin-shaped .
We had some difficulty in getting this case open without injury ;
but having at=length accomplished the task , we came to a second , coffin-shaped , and very considerably less in size than the exterior one ,
but resembling it precisely in every other respect . The interval between the two was filled with resin , which had , in some degree , defaced the
colors of the interior box . Upon opening this latter ( which we did quite easily ) , we arrived at a third case , also coffin-shaped , and varying from the second one in no
the second and the third case there was no interval -- the one fitting accurately within the other . Removing the third case , we discovered and took out the body itself .
We had expected to find it , as=usual , enveloped in frequent rolls , or bandages , of linen ;
The paintings represented subjects connected with the various supposed duties of the soul , and its presentation to different divinities , with numerous identical human figures , intended , very probably , as portraits of the persons embalmed .
Extending from head to foot was a columnar , or perpendicular , inscription , in phonetic hieroglyphics , giving again his name and titles , and the names and titles of his relations .
Around the neck thus ensheathed , was a collar of cylindrical glass beads , diverse in color , and so arranged as=to form images of deities , of the scarabaeus , etc , with the winged globe .
Around the small of the waist was a similar collar or belt .
Stripping off the papyrus , we found the flesh in excellent preservation , with no perceptible odor .
The color was reddish .
The skin was hard , smooth , and glossy .
The teeth and hair were in good condition .
The eyes ( it seemed ) had been removed , and glass ones substituted , which were very beautiful and wonderfully life-like , with the exception of somewhat too determined a stare .
The fingers and the nails were brilliantly gilded .
We searched the corpse very carefully for the usual openings through which the entrails are extracted , but , to our surprise , we could
discover none . No member of the party was at that period aware that entire or unopened mummies are not infrequently met .
The brain it was customary to withdraw through the nose ; the intestines through an
incision in the side ; the body was then shaved , washed , and salted ; then laid aside for several weeks , when the operation of embalming , properly
Hereupon it was agreed to postpone the internal examination until the next evening ; and we were about to separate for the present , when some one suggested an experiment or two with the Voltaic pile .
The application of electricity to a mummy three or four thousand years old at the least , was an idea , if=not very sage , still sufficiently original , and we all caught it at=once .
About one-tenth in earnest and nine-tenths in jest , we arranged a battery in the Doctor's study , and conveyed thither the Egyptian .
It was only after much trouble that we succeeded in laying bare some portions of the temporal muscle which appeared of less stony rigidity than other parts of the frame , but which , as we had anticipated , of course , gave no indication of galvanic susceptibility when brought in contact with the wire . This , the first trial , indeed , seemed decisive ,
and , with a hearty laugh at our own absurdity , we were bidding each other good-night , when my eyes , happening to fall upon those of the
Mummy , were there immediately riveted in amazement . My brief glance , in fact , had sufficed to assure me that the orbs which we had all supposed
to be glass , and which were originally noticeable for a certain wild
stare , were now so=far covered by the lids , that only a small portion of the _tunica albuginea_ remained visible . With a shout I called attention to the fact , and it became immediately obvious to all .
I can_ _not say that I was alarmed at the phenomenon , because « alarmed » is , in my case , not exactly the word . It is possible , however , that , but=for
the Brown=Stout , I might have been a=little nervous . As=for the rest
of the company , they really made no attempt at concealing the downright fright which possessed them . Doctor Ponnonner was a man to be pitied .
Mr.=Gliddon , by some peculiar process , rendered himself invisible .
Mr. Silk Buckingham , I fancy , will scarcely be so bold as=to deny that he made his way , upon all fours , under the table .
After the first shock of astonishment , however , we resolved , as a matter
of=course , upon further experiment forthwith . Our operations were now
directed against the great toe of the right-foot . We made an incision over the outside of the exterior _os sesamoideum pollicis pedis , _ and
thus got at the root of the abductor muscle . Readjusting the battery , we now applied the fluid to the bisected nerves -- when , with a movement of exceeding life-likeness , the Mummy first drew up its right knee so=as=to bring it nearly in contact with the abdomen , and then , straightening the limb with inconceivable force , bestowed a kick upon Doctor Ponnonner , which had the effect of discharging that gentleman , like an arrow from a catapult , through a window into the street below .
We rushed out _en masse_ to bring in the mangled remains of the victim , but had the happiness to meet him upon the staircase , coming up in an unaccountable hurry , brimful of the most ardent philosophy , and more than ever impressed with the necessity of prosecuting our experiment
with vigor and with zeal . It was by his advice , accordingly , that we made , upon the spot , a profound incision into the tip of the subject's nose , while the Doctor
himself , laying violent hands upon it , pulled it into vehement contact with the wire . Morally and physically -- figuratively and literally -- was the effect electric .
In the first place , the corpse opened its eyes and winked very rapidly for several minutes , as does Mr.=Barnes in the pantomime , in the
second place , it sneezed ;
in the third , it sat upon end ;
in the fourth , it shook its fist in Doctor Ponnonner's face ;
Of Doctor Ponnonner nothing better was to be expected .
He is a poor little fat fool who knows no better .
I pity and forgive him .
have been so much among us that you speak Egyptian fully as=well , I think , as you write your mother tongue -- you , whom I have always been
led to regard as the firm friend of the mummies -- I really did anticipate more gentlemanly conduct from you . What am I to think of your standing quietly by and seeing me thus unhandsomely used ? What am I to suppose by your permitting Tom , Dick , and Harry to strip me of my coffins , and my clothes , in this wretchedly cold climate ? In what light ( to come to the
It will be taken for=granted , no doubt , that upon hearing this speech under the circumstances , we all either made for the door , or fell into violent hysterics , or went off in a general swoon . One of these three
things was , I say , to be expected .
Indeed each and all of these lines of conduct might have been very plausibly pursued . And , upon my word , I am
at a loss to know how or why it was that we pursued neither the one nor
the other . But , perhaps , the true reason is to be sought in the spirit of the age , which proceeds by the rule of contraries altogether , and
is now usually admitted as the solution of every thing in the way of paradox and impossibility . Or , perhaps , after all , it was only the
Mummy's exceedingly natural and matter-of-course air that divested his words of the terrible . However this may be , the facts are clear , and no member of our party betrayed any very particular trepidation , or seemed
to consider that any thing had gone very especially wrong . For my part I was convinced it was all=right , and merely stepped aside , out=of the range of the Egyptian's fist .
Doctor Ponnonner thrust his hands into his breeches' pockets , looked hard at the Mummy , and grew
excessively red in the face . Mr.=Glidden stroked his whiskers and drew
up the collar of his shirt . Mr.=Buckingham hung down his head , and put
his right thumb into the left corner of his mouth . The Egyptian regarded him with a severe countenance for some minutes and
at=length , with a sneer , said : " Why do_ _n't you speak , Mr.=Buckingham ?
Did you hear what I asked you , or not ? Do take your thumb out=of your mouth ! " Mr.=Buckingham , hereupon , gave a slight start , took his right thumb out of the left corner of his mouth , and , by way of indemnification inserted his left thumb in the right corner of the aperture above-mentioned . Not being able to get an answer from Mr.=B .
, the figure turned peevishly to Mr.=Gliddon , and , in a peremptory tone , demanded in general terms what we all meant . Mr.=Gliddon replied at great length , in phonetics ;
and but=for the deficiency of American printing-offices in hieroglyphical type , it would afford me much pleasure to record here , in the original , the whole of
his very excellent speech . I may as=well take this occasion to remark , that all the subsequent conversation in which the Mummy took a part , was carried on in primitive
the mother tongue of the Mummy with inimitable fluency and grace ; but I
could not help observing that ( owing , no doubt , to the introduction of images entirely modern , and , of=course , entirely novel to the stranger ) the two travellers were reduced , occasionally , to the employment of
Buckingham failed to convey the absolutely modern idea « wig , » until ( at Doctor Ponnonner's suggestion ) he grew very pale in the face , and consented to take off his own .
Here Doctor Ponnonner made ready his instruments .
In=regard=to the latter suggestions of the orator , it appears that Allamistakeo had certain scruples of conscience , the nature of which I
did not distinctly learn ; but he expressed himself satisfied with the apologies tendered , and , getting down from the table , shook hands with
the company all-round . When this ceremony was at an end , we immediately busied ourselves in
repairing the damages which our subject had sustained from the scalpel . We sewed up the wound in his temple , bandaged his foot , and applied a
square inch of black plaster to the tip of his nose . It was now observed that the Count ( this was the title , it seems , of
Allamistakeo ) had a slight fit of shivering -- no doubt from the cold . The Doctor immediately repaired to his wardrobe , and soon returned with a black dress coat , made in Jennings' best manner , a pair of sky-blue plaid pantaloons with straps , a pink gingham chemise , a flapped vest of brocade , a white sack overcoat , a walking cane with a hook , a hat with no brim , patent-leather boots , straw-colored kid gloves , an eye-glass , a pair of whiskers , and a waterfall cravat .
Owing=to the disparity of size between the Count and the doctor ( the proportion being as two=to=one ) , there was some little difficulty in adjusting these habiliments upon the person of the Egyptian ; but when all was arranged , he might have been said to be dressed . Mr.=Gliddon , therefore , gave him his arm , and led
him to a comfortable chair by the fire , while the Doctor rang the bell upon the spot and ordered a supply of cigars and wine .
The conversation soon grew animated .
Much curiosity was , of=course , expressed in=regard=to the somewhat remarkable fact of Allamistakeo's still remaining alive .
« I should have thought , » observed Mr.=Buckingham , " that it is high time
you were dead .
" « Why , » replied the Count , very much astonished , " I am little more=than seven hundred years old !
My father lived a thousand , and was by=no=means
in his dotage when he died .
" Here ensued a brisk series of questions and computations , by=means=of
It had been five thousand and fifty years and some months since he had been consigned to the catacombs at Eleithias .
« In what ? »
said the Count .
« In asphaltum , » persisted Mr.=B .
" Ah , yes ;
I have some faint notion of what you mean ;
it might be made to answer , no doubt -- but in my time we employed scarcely any thing else
" « Had I been , as you say , dead , » replied the Count , " it is more=than probable that dead , I should still be ; for I perceive you are yet in the infancy of Calvanism , and can_ _not accomplish with it what was a common
thing among us in the old days . But the fact is , I fell into catalepsy , and it was considered by my best friends that I was either dead or
should be ;
they accordingly embalmed me at=once -- I presume you are aware
of the chief principle of the embalming process ? " « Why not altogether . »
" Why , I perceive -- a deplorable condition of ignorance ! Well I can_ _not enter into details just now : but it is necessary to explain that to embalm ( properly speaking ) , in Egypt , was to arrest indefinitely all the animal functions subjected to the process .
I repeat that the leading principle of embalmment consisted , with us , in the immediately arresting , and holding in
perpetual abeyance , all the animal functions subjected to the process . To be brief , in whatever condition the individual was , at the period of
embalmment , in that condition he remained . Now , as it is my good fortune
« The blood of the Scarabaeus ! »
exclaimed Doctor Ponnonner .
" Yes .
The Scarabaeus was the insignium or the « arms , » of a very
distinguished and very rare patrician family . To be ' of the blood of the
Scarabaeus , ' is merely to be one of that family of which the Scarabaeus is the insignium .
I speak figuratively . " « But what has this to do with you being alive ? »
" Why , it is the general custom in Egypt to deprive a corpse , before embalmment , of its bowels and brains ; the race of the Scarabaei alone
did not coincide with the custom . Had I not been a Scarabeus , therefore ,
I should have been without bowels and brains ; and without either it is
« Beyond doubt . »
« I thought , » said Mr.=Gliddon , very meekly , " that the Scarabaeus was one
of the Egyptian gods .
" « One of the Egyptian _what ? »
_ exclaimed the Mummy , starting to its feet . « Gods ! » repeated the traveller .
« Mr. Gliddon , I really am astonished to hear you talk in this style , »
said the Count , resuming his chair . " No nation upon the face of the
earth has ever acknowledged more=than one god .
There was here a pause .
At=length the colloquy was renewed by Doctor Ponnonner .
« It is not improbable , then , from what you have explained , » said he , " that among the catacombs near the Nile there may exist other mummies of the Scarabaeus tribe , in a condition of vitality ?
" « There can be no question of it , » replied the Count ; " all the Scarabaei embalmed accidentally while alive , are alive now .
Even some of those purposely so embalmed , may have been overlooked by their executors , and still remain in the tomb .
« With great pleasure ! » answered the Mummy , after surveying me leisurely through his eye-glass -- for it was the first-time I had ventured to address him a direct question .
« With great pleasure , » he said . " The usual duration of man's life , in my time , was about eight hundred years .
Few men died , unless by most extraordinary accident , before the age of six hundred ;
few lived longer than a decade of centuries ;
but eight were considered the natural term .
After the discovery of the embalming principle , as I have already described it to you , it occurred to our philosophers that a laudable curiosity might be gratified , and , at the same time , the interests of science much advanced , by living this natural term in installments .
In the case of history , indeed , experience demonstrated that something of
this kind was indispensable . An historian , for=example , having attained the age of five hundred , would write a book with great labor and then get himself carefully embalmed ; leaving instructions to his executors pro tem . , that they should cause him to be revivified after the lapse of a certain period -- say five or six hundred years . Resuming existence at the expiration of this time , he would invariably find his great work converted into a species of hap-hazard note-book -- that is to say , into
a=kind=of literary arena for the conflicting guesses , riddles , and personal squabbles of whole herds of exasperated commentators . These guesses , etc. , which passed under the name of annotations , or
emendations , were found so completely to have enveloped , distorted , and overwhelmed the text , that the author had to go about with a lantern to discover his own book .
When discovered , it was never worth the trouble of the search .
After re-writing it throughout , it was regarded as the bounden duty of the historian to set himself to work immediately in correcting , from his own private knowledge and experience , the traditions of the day concerning the epoch at which he had originally
lived . Now this process of re-scription and personal rectification , pursued by various individual sages from time to time , had the effect of preventing our history from degenerating into absolute fable .
« By all means , sir , » replied the Count , drawing up .
« I merely wished to ask you a question , » said the Doctor . " You mentioned
the historian's personal correction of traditions respecting his own epoch .
Pray , sir , upon an average what proportion of these Kabbala were usually found to be right ? " " The Kabbala , as you properly term them , sir , were generally discovered to be precisely on a par with the facts recorded in the un-re-written histories themselves ; -- that is to say , not one individual iota of either was ever known , under any circumstances , to be not totally and radically wrong . " « But since it is quite clear , » resumed the Doctor , " that at=least five thousand years have elapsed since your entombment , I take it for
« Sir ! »
said the Count=Allamistakeo .
latter at=length said , hesitatingly : " The ideas you have suggested are to me , I confess , utterly novel .
During my time I never knew any one to entertain so singular a fancy as that the universe ( or this world if you will have it so ) ever had
a beginning at=all . I remember once , and once only , hearing something remotely hinted , by a man of many speculations , concerning the origin _of the human race ;
it , however , in a generical sense , with reference to the spontaneous germination from rank soil ( just as a thousand of the lower genera of creatures are germinated ) -- the spontaneous germination , I say , of five
vast hordes of men , simultaneously upspringing in five distinct and nearly equal divisions of the globe .
" « I confess again , » replied the Count , with much suavity , " that I am somewhat at a loss to comprehend you ;
Here our whole party , joining voices , detailed , at great length , the assumptions of phrenology and the marvels of animal magnetism .
smiled rather contemptuously , and said they were . This put me a little out , but I began to make other inquiries in regard to his astronomical knowledge , when a member of the company , who had never as=yet opened his mouth , whispered in my ear , that for information
I then questioned the Mummy about burning-glasses and lenses , and , in general , about the manufacture of glass ;
but I had not made an end of my queries before the silent member again touched me quietly on the elbow , and begged me for God's sake to take a peep at Diodorus=Siculus .
As for the Count , he merely asked me , in the way of reply , if we moderns possessed any=such microscopes as would enable us to cut cameos in the style of the Egyptians .
While I was thinking how I should answer this question , little Doctor Ponnonner committed himself in a very
extraordinary way .
« Look at our architecture ! » he exclaimed , greatly to the indignation of both the travellers , who pinched him black and blue to no purpose .
« Look , » he cried with enthusiasm , " at the Bowling-Green=Fountain in New York !
He explained that the portico alone was adorned with no less than four and twenty columns , five feet in diameter , and ten feet apart .
The Count said that he regretted not being able to remember , just at that moment , the precise dimensions of any one of the principal
buildings of the city of Aznac , whose foundations were laid in the night of Time , but the ruins of which were still standing , at the epoch of his entombment , in a vast plain of sand to the westward of Thebes .
He recollected , however , ( talking of the porticoes , ) that one affixed to an inferior palace in a=kind=of suburb called Carnac , consisted of a hundred and forty-four columns , thirty-seven feet in circumference , and
twenty-five feet apart . The approach to this portico , from the Nile , was through an avenue two miles long , composed of sphynxes , statues , and obelisks , twenty , sixty , and a hundred feet in height .
The palace itself ( as=well=as he could remember ) was , in one direction , two miles long , and might have been altogether about seven in circuit .
Its walls were richly painted all-over , within and without , with hieroglyphics .
He would not pretend to assert that even fifty or sixty of the Doctor's Capitols might have been built within these walls , but he was by no means sure that two or three hundred of them might not have
been squeezed in with some trouble . That palace at Carnac was an
insignificant little building after all . He ( the Count ) , however , could not conscientiously refuse to admit the ingenuity , magnificence , and
superiority of the Fountain at the Bowling=Green , as described by the Doctor . Nothing like it , he was forced to allow , had ever been seen in Egypt or elsewhere .
I here asked the Count what he had to say to our railroads .
« Nothing , » he replied , « in=particular . »
They were rather slight , rather ill-conceived , and clumsily put=together .
They could not be compared , of course , with the vast , level , direct , iron-grooved causeways upon which the Egyptians conveyed entire temples and solid obelisks of a hundred and fifty feet in altitude .
I spoke of our gigantic mechanical forces .
He agreed that we knew something in that way , but inquired how I should have gone to work in getting up the imposts on the lintels of even the little palace at Carnac .
This question I concluded not to hear , and demanded if he had any idea of Artesian wells ; but he simply raised his eyebrows ;
while Mr.=Gliddon winked at me very hard and said , in a low tone , that one had been recently discovered by the engineers employed to bore for water in the Great Oasis . I then mentioned our steel ; but the foreigner elevated his nose , and
asked me if our steel could have executed the sharp carved work seen on the obelisks , and which was wrought altogether by edge-tools of copper .
This disconcerted us so greatly that we thought it advisable to vary the attack to Metaphysics .
We sent for a copy of a book called the « Dial , » and read out=of it a chapter or two about something that is not very clear , but which the Bostonians call the Great=Movement=of=Progress .
The Count merely said that Great=Movements were awfully common things in
his day , and as=for Progress , it was at=one=time quite a nuisance , but
it never progressed . We then spoke of the great beauty and importance of Democracy , and were at much trouble in impressing the Count with a due sense of the advantages we enjoyed in living where there was suffrage ad-libitum , and
no king . He listened with marked interest , and in=fact seemed not a little
amused . When we had done , he said that , a great while ago , there had
occurred something of a very similar sort . Thirteen Egyptian provinces determined all=at=once to be free , and to set a magnificent example to
the rest of mankind . They assembled their wise men , and concocted the most ingenious constitution it is possible to conceive .
For a while they managed remarkably well ;
only their habit of bragging was prodigious .
The thing ended , however , in the consolidation of the thirteen states , with some fifteen or twenty others , in the most odious and insupportable despotism that was ever heard of upon the face of the Earth .
I asked what was the name of the usurping tyrant .
As=well=as the Count could recollect , it was Mob .
Not knowing what to say to this , I raised my voice , and deplored the Egyptian ignorance of steam .
The Count looked at me with much astonishment , but made no answer .
The silent gentleman , however , gave me a violent nudge in the ribs with his elbows -- told me I had sufficiently exposed myself for once -- and demanded if I was really such a fool as not to know that the modern steam-engine is derived from the invention of Hero , through Solomon=de=Caus .
We were now in imminent danger of being discomfited ;
but , as good luck would have it , Doctor Ponnonner , having rallied , returned to our rescue , and inquired if the people of Egypt would seriously pretend to rival the
moderns in the all -- important particular of dress . The Count , at this , glanced downward to the straps of his pantaloons , and then taking hold of the end of one of his coat-tails , held it up close to his eyes for some minutes .
Letting it fall , at=last , his mouth extended itself very gradually from ear to ear ;
but I do not remember that he said any thing in the way of reply .
Hereupon we recovered our spirits , and the Doctor , approaching the Mummy with great dignity , desired it to say candidly , upon its honor as a gentleman , if the Egyptians had comprehended , at any period , the manufacture of either Ponnonner's lozenges or Brandreth's pills .
We looked , with profound anxiety , for an answer -- but in vain .
It was not forthcoming .
The Egyptian blushed and hung down his head .
Never was triumph more consummate ;
never was defeat borne with so ill a grace .
Indeed , I could not endure the spectacle of the poor Mummy's mortification .
I reached my hat , bowed to him stiffly , and took leave .
Upon getting home I found it past four o'clock , and went immediately to bed .
It is now ten=A.M.=I have been up since seven , penning these
shall behold no=more .
My wife is a shrew .
convinced that every thing is going wrong .
Besides , I am anxious to know who will be President in 2045 .
As soon , therefore , as I shave and swallow a cup of coffee , I shall just step over to Ponnonner's and get embalmed for a couple of hundred years . The Man That Was Used Up .
I Cannot just now remember when or where I first made the acquaintance of that truly fine-looking fellow , Brevet=Brigadier=General=John=A.=B .
C.=Smith .
Some one _did_ introduce me to the gentleman , I am sure -- at some public meeting , I know very well -- held about something of great importance , no doubt -- at some place or other , I feel convinced , -- whose
name I have unaccountably forgotten . The truth is -- that the introduction was attended , upon my part , with a degree of anxious embarrassment which
operated to prevent any definite impressions of either time or place . I am constitutionally nervous -- this , with me , is a family failing , and I can_ _n't help it .
There was something , as it were , remarkable -- yes , _remarkable_ , although this is but a feeble term to express my full meaning -- about the entire
individuality of the personage in=question . He was , perhaps , six feet
in height , and of a presence singularly commanding . There was an _air distingue_ pervading the whole man , which spoke of high breeding , and hinted at high birth .
Upon this topic -- the topic of Smith's personal appearance -- I have a=kind=of melancholy satisfaction in being minute .
His head of hair would have done honor to a Brutus ;
-- nothing could be more richly flowing , or possess a brighter gloss . It was of a jetty black ;
-- which was also the color , or more properly the no color of his unimaginable whiskers . You perceive I can_ _not speak of these latter
without enthusiasm ; it is not too much to say that they were the
handsomest pair of whiskers under the sun . At all events , they encircled , and at times partially overshadowed , a mouth utterly unequalled . Here were the most entirely even , and the most brilliantly
white of all conceivable teeth . From between them , upon every proper
occasion , issued a voice of surpassing clearness , melody , and strength .
In the matter of eyes , also , my acquaintance was pre-eminently endowed .
Either one of such a pair was worth a couple of the ordinary ocular
organs . They were of a deep hazel , exceedingly large and lustrous ;
and there was perceptible about them , ever and anon , just that amount of interesting obliquity which gives pregnancy to expression .
The bust of the General was unquestionably the finest bust I ever
saw . For your life you could not have found a fault with its wonderful
proportion . This rare peculiarity set off to great advantage a pair of shoulders which would have called up a blush of conscious inferiority
into the countenance of the marble Apollo . I have a passion for fine shoulders , and may say that I never beheld them in perfection before .
The arms altogether were admirably modelled .
Nor were the lower limbs less superb .
These were , indeed , the _ne plus ultra_ of good legs .
Every connoisseur in such matters admitted the legs to be good .
There was neither too much flesh , nor too little , -- neither rudeness nor fragility .
I could not imagine a more graceful curve than that of the _os femoris_ , and there was just that due gentle prominence in the rear of the
_fibula_ which goes to the conformation of a properly proportioned calf . I wish to God my young and talented friend Chiponchipino , the sculptor ,
had but seen the legs of Brevet=Brigadier=General=John=A.=B . C.=Smith .
But although men so absolutely fine-looking are neither as plenty as reasons or blackberries , still I could not bring myself to believe that _the remarkable_ something to which I alluded just now , -- that the odd air of _je ne sais quoi_ which hung about my new acquaintance , -- lay altogether , or indeed at=all , in the supreme excellence of his bodily endowments . Perhaps it might be traced to the _manner_ ;
-- yet here again I could not pretend to be positive . There _was_ a primness , not to
which , observed in a more diminutive figure , would have had the least
little savor in the world , of affectation , pomposity or constraint , but
which noticed in a gentleman of his undoubted dimensions , was readily
placed to the account of reserve , _hauteur_ -- of a commendable sense , in short , of what is due=to the dignity of colossal proportion .
The kind friend who presented me to General=Smith whispered in my ear
some few words of comment upon the man . He was a _remarkable_ man -- a
_very_ remarkable man -- indeed one of the _most_ remarkable men of the
age .
He was an especial favorite , too , with the ladies -- chiefly on account of his high reputation for courage .
" In _that_ point he is unrivalled -- indeed he is a perfect desperado -- a down-right fire-eater , and no mistake , " said my friend , here dropping his voice excessively low , and thrilling me with the mystery of his tone .
" A downright fire-eater , and _no_ mistake .
Showed _that_ , I should say ,
to some purpose , in the late tremendous swamp-fight away down South , with the Bugaboo and Kickapoo=Indians .
" [ Here my friend opened his eyes to=some=extent . ] " Bless my soul !
-- blood and thunder , and all that !
-- _prodigies_ of valor ! -- heard of him of=course ? -- you know he_ _s the man " -- " Man alive , how _do_ you do ?
why , how _are_ ye ? _very_ glad to see ye , indeed !
" here interrupted the General himself , seizing my companion by the hand as he drew near , and bowing stiffly , but profoundly , as I was
presented . I then thought , ( and I think so still , ) that I never heard a clearer nor a stronger voice , nor beheld a finer set of teeth : but I
_must_ say that I was sorry for the interruption just at that moment , as , owing=to the whispers and insinuations aforesaid , my interest had been greatly excited in the hero of the Bugaboo and Kickapoo campaign .
However , the delightfully luminous conversation of Brevet=Brigadier General John=A.=B .
C.=Smith soon completely dissipated this chagrin . My
friend leaving us immediately , we had quite a long _tete-a-tete_ , and I was not only pleased but _really_ -- instructed .
I never heard a more fluent talker , or a man of greater general information .
exceedingly tempted to do so . I perceived , too , that the gallant soldier preferred topics of philosophical interest , and that he delighted ,
especially , in commenting upon the rapid march of mechanical invention .
Indeed , lead him where I would , this was a point to which he invariably came back . « There is nothing at all like it , » he would say ;
" we are a wonderful people , and live in a wonderful age . Parachutes and
rail-roads -- man-traps and spring-guns ! Our steam-boats are upon every sea , and the Nassau balloon packet is about to run regular trips ( fare either way only twenty pounds sterling ) between London and Timbuctoo .
There is really no end to the march of invention .
The most wonderful -- the most ingenious -- and let me add , Mr.-- Mr.-- Thompson , I
I left General=Smith with a heightened interest in the man , with an exalted opinion of his conversational powers , and a deep sense of the valuable privileges we enjoy in living in this age of mechanical invention . My curiosity , however , had not been altogether satisfied ,
and I resolved to prosecute immediate inquiry among my acquaintances touching the Brevet=Brigadier=General himself , and particularly respecting the tremendous events _quorum pars magna fuit_ , during the Bugaboo and Kickapoo campaign . The first opportunity which presented itself , and which ( _horresco referens_ ) I did not in the least scruple to seize , occurred at the Church of the Reverend=Doctor=Drummummupp , where I found myself
established , one Sunday , just at sermon time , not only in the pew , but by the side , of that worthy and communicative little friend of mine ,
Miss=Tabitha=T.=Thus seated , I congratulated myself , and with much
reason , upon the very flattering state of affairs . If any person knew
anything about Brevet=Brigadier=General=John=A.=B . C.=Smith , that person , it was clear to me , was Miss=Tabitha=T.=We telegraphed a=few signals , and then commenced , _soto voce_ , a brisk _tete-a-tete_ .
« Smith ! »
said she , in reply to my very earnest inquiry ; " Smith !
-- why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
Bless me , I thought you _knew_ all about _him !
_ This is a wonderfully inventive age !
Horrid affair that ! -- a
bloody set of wretches , those Kickapoos ! -- fought like a hero -- prodigies
of valor -- immortal renown .
Smith ! -- Brevet=Brigadier=General=John=A.=B .
C . !
why , you know he_ _s the man " -- « Man , » here broke in Doctor Drummummupp , at the top of his voice , and with a thump that came near knocking the pulpit about our ears ;
" man that is born of a woman hath but a short time to live ;
he cometh up and is cut down like a flower !
There was no help for it ;
so I submitted with a good grace , and listened , in all the martyrdom of dignified silence , to the balance of that very capital discourse .
That fine tragedian , Climax , was doing Iago to a very crowded house , and I experienced some
little difficulty in making my wishes understood ; especially , as our box
was next the slips , and completely overlooked the stage . « Smith ? »
said Miss=Arabella , as she at=length comprehended the purport of my query ;
« Smith ?
-- why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ? »
« Smith ? »
inquired Miranda , musingly .
" God bless me , did you ever behold a finer figure ?
" « Never , madam , but _do_ tell me » -- « Or=so inimitable grace ? »
« Never , upon my word !
-- But pray inform me » --
« Or=so just an appreciation of stage effect ? » « Madam ! »
" Or a more delicate sense of the true beauties of Shakespeare ? Be so good as=to look at that leg ! "
« The devil ! »
and I turned again to her sister .
« Smith ? »
said she , " why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
Horrid affair that , was_ _n't it ?
-- great wretches , those Bugaboos -- savage and so=on -- but we live in a wonderfully inventive age !
-- Smith !
-- O yes !
great man !
-- perfect desperado -- immortal renown -- prodigies of valor !
_Never heard !
_ " [ This was given in a scream . ] « Bless=my=soul ! why,=he_ _s=the=man » --
" ----- mandragora
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep Which thou owd'st yesterday ! " here roared our Climax just in my ear , and shaking his fist in my face all=the=time , in a way that I _could_ _n't_ stand , and I _wouldn't_ . I left
the Misses=Cognoscenti immediately , went behind the scenes forthwith ,
and gave the beggarly scoundrel such a thrashing as I trust he will
remember to the day of his death . At the _soiree_ of the lovely widow , Mrs.=Kathleen=O'Trump , I
was confident that I should meet with no similar disappointment . Accordingly , I was no sooner seated at the card-table , with my pretty
hostess for a _vis-a-vis_ , than I propounded those questions the solution of which had become a matter so essential to my peace .
« Smith ? »
said my partner , " why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
Horrid affair that , was_ _n't it ?
-- diamonds , did you say ?
-- terrible wretches those
Kickapoos !
-- we are playing _whist_ , if you please , Mr.=Tattle -- however , this is the age of invention , most certainly _the_ age , one
may say -- _the_ age _par excellence_ -- speak French ?
-- oh , quite a hero -- perfect desperado !
-- _no hearts_ , Mr.=Tattle ? I do_ _n't believe
it ! -- immortal renown and all that ! -- prodigies of valor !
_Never heard ! !
_ -- why , bless me , he_ _s the man " --
« Mann ?
-- _Captain_ Mann ? »
here screamed some little feminine interloper from the farthest corner of the room .
" Are you talking about Captain
Mann and the duel ?
-- oh , I _must_ hear -- do tell -- go on , Mrs.=O'Trump !
-- do now go on !
Yes ! Mrs.=O'Trump , she went on , and I -- I went off .
There was no chance of hearing anything farther that evening in=regard=to Brevet Brigadier General=John=A.=B .
C.=Smith .
« Smith ? »
said Mrs.=P . , as we twirled about together in a _pas de
zephyr_ , " Smith ?
-- why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
Dreadful business that of the Bugaboos , was_ _n't it ?
-- dreadful creatures , those Indians !
-- _do_ turn out your toes !
I really am ashamed of you -- man of great courage , poor fellow !
-- but this is a wonderful age for invention -- O dear me ,
I_ _m out=of breath -- quite a desperado -- prodigies of valor -- _never
heard ! !
_ -- can_ _n't believe it -- I shall have to sit down and enlighten
you -- Smith ! why , he_ _s the man " --
« Man-_Fred_ , I tell you ! » here bawled out Miss=Bas-Bleu , as I led Mrs. Pirouette to a seat .
" Did ever anybody hear the like ?
It_ _s Man-_Fred_ , I say , and not at=all by any means Man-_Friday_ .
" Here Miss=Bas-Bleu beckoned to me in a very peremptory manner ;
and I was obliged , will I nill I , to leave Mrs.=P. for the purpose of deciding a dispute touching the title of a certain poetical drama of Lord=Byron's .
Although I pronounced , with great promptness , that the true title was Man-_Friday_ , and not by any means Man-_Fred_ , yet when I returned to seek Mrs.
Pirouette she was not to be discovered , and I made my retreat from the house in a very bitter spirit of animosity against the whole race of the Bas-Bleus . Matters had now assumed a really serious aspect , and I resolved to call
at=once upon my particular friend , Mr.=Theodore=Sinivate ; for I knew that here at=least I should get something like definite information . « Smith ? »
said he , in his well-known peculiar way of drawling out his syllables ; " Smith ?
-- why , not General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
Savage affair that
with the Kickapo-o-o-os , was_ _n't it ?
Say ! do_ _n't you think so ?
-- perfect despera-a-ado -- great pity , ' pon my honor !
-- wonderfully inventive
age ! -- pro-o-odigies of valor !
« Captain Mann be d -- d ! » said I ; « please to go on with your story . »
" Hem !
-- oh well !
-- quite _la meme cho-o-ose_ , as we say in France .
Smith ,
eh ? Brigadier-General=John=A.=B .
C . ?
I say " -- [ here Mr.=S. thought proper to put his finger to the side of his nose ] -- " I say , you do_ _n't mean to insinuate now , really and truly , and conscientiously , that you do_ _n't know all about that affair of Smith's , as=well=as I do , eh ?
Smith ?
John
A-B-C . ?
Why , bless me , he_ _s the ma-a-an " --
« No-o-o ! »
said he , looking wise , « nor the man in the mo-o-on . »
This reply I considered a pointed and positive insult , and so left the house at=once in high dudgeon , with a firm resolve to call my friend ,
Mr.=Sinivate , to a speedy account for his ungentlemanly conduct and ill-breeding .
In the meantime , however , I had no notion of being thwarted touching the
information I desired .
Here , at=least , there should be no chance for equivocation .
I would be plain , positive , peremptory -- as short as pie-crust -- as concise as Tacitus or Montesquieu .
It was early when I called , and the General was dressing ; but I pleaded
urgent business , and was shown at=once into his bed-room by an old negro valet , who remained in attendance during my visit . As I entered the
chamber , I looked about , of=course , for the occupant , but did not immediately perceive him .
There was a large and exceedingly odd-looking bundle of something which lay close by my feet on the floor , and , as I was not in the best humor in the world , I gave it a kick out=of the way .
« Hem !
ahem !
rather civil that , I should say ! »
said the bundle , in one of the smallest , and altogether the funniest little voices , between a squeak and a whistle , that I ever heard in all the days of my existence .
« Ahem !
rather civil that , I should observe . »
I fairly shouted with terror , and made off , at a tangent , into the farthest extremity of the room .
« God bless me ! my dear fellow , » here again whistled the bundle , " what -- what -- what -- why , what _is_ the matter ?
I really believe you do_ _n't know me at=all .
" What _could_ I say to all this -- what _could_ I ?
I staggered into an arm-chair , and , with staring eyes and open mouth , awaited the solution of the wonder .
« Strange you should_ _n't know me though , is_ _n't it ? »
There was only a single leg , however , apparent .
" Strange you should_ _n't know me , though , is_ _n't it ?
Pompey , bring me that leg !
" Here=Pompey handed the bundle , a very capital cork leg , already dressed , which it screwed on in a trice ;
and then it stood up before my eyes .
« And a bloody action it _was_ , » continued the thing , as=if in a
soliloquy ; " but then one must_ _n't fight with the Bugaboos and Kickapoos , and think of coming off with a mere scratch .
Pompey , I_ _ll thank you now
for that arm. Thomas " [ turning to me ] " is decidedly the best hand at a cork leg ;
but if you should ever want an arm , my dear fellow , you must really let me recommend you to Bishop .
" Here=Pompey screwed on an arm.
" We had rather hot work of it , that you may say .
Now , you dog , slip on my shoulders and bosom !
« Bosom ! »
said I .
" Pompey , will you _never_ be ready with that wig ?
Scalping is a rough process after all ;
but then you can procure such a capital scratch at De
L'Orme's .
" « Scratch ! » " Now , you nigger , my teeth !
For a _good_ set of these you had better go to Parmly's at=once ;
high prices , but excellent work .
I swallowed some very capital articles , though , when the big Bugaboo rammed me down with
the butt end of his rifle .
"
« Butt end !
ram down ! !
my eye ! ! »
" O yes , by-the-by , my eye -- here , Pompey , you scamp , screw it in !
Those Kickapoos are not so very slow at a gouge ;
but he_ _s a belied man , that Dr.=Williams , after all ;
you can_ _n't imagine how well I see with the eyes of his make .
" I now began very clearly to perceive that the object before me was nothing more nor less=than my new acquaintance , Brevet=Brigadier=General
John=A .
B.=C.=Smith . The manipulations of Pompey had made , I must confess , a very striking difference in the appearance of the personal
man . The voice , however , still puzzled me no little ; but even this
apparent mystery was speedily cleared up . « Pompey , you black rascal , » squeaked the General , " I really do believe
you would let me go out without my palate . " Hereupon , the negro , grumbling out an apology , went up=to his master , opened his mouth with the knowing air of a horse-jockey , and adjusted therein a somewhat singular-looking machine , in a very dexterous manner ,
that I could not altogether comprehend . The alteration , however , in the
entire expression of the General's countenance was instantaneous and
surprising .
When he again spoke , his voice had resumed all that rich
melody and strength which I had noticed upon our original introduction .
« D -- n the vagabonds ! » said he , in so clear a tone that I positively started at the change , " D -- n the vagabonds ! they not only knocked in the roof of my mouth , but took the trouble to cut off at=least seven-eighths
of my tongue . There is_ _n't Bonfanti's equal , however , in America , for
really good articles of this description . I can recommend you to him with confidence , " [ here the General bowed , ] " and assure you that I have
the greatest pleasure in so doing . " I acknowledged his kindness in my best manner , and took leave of him at once , with a perfect understanding of the true state of affairs -- with a full comprehension of the mystery which had troubled me so long .
It was evident .
It was a clear case .
Brevet=Brigadier=General=John=A.=B . C .
Smith was the man -- was _the man that was used up_ .
Silence -- A Fable Alcman . The mountain pinnacles slumber ;
valleys , crags and caves are silent .
« Listen to me , » said the Demon as he placed his hand upon my head .
" The region of which I speak is a dreary region in Libya , by the borders of the river Zaire .
And there is no quiet there , nor silence .
" The waters of the river have a saffron and sickly hue ; and they flow not onwards to the sea , but palpitate forever and forever beneath the
red eye of the sun with a tumultuous and convulsive motion . For many miles on either side of the river's oozy bed is a pale desert of
gigantic water-lilies . They sigh one unto the other in that solitude , and stretch towards the heaven their long and ghastly necks , and nod to and fro their everlasting heads . And there is an indistinct murmur which
cometh out from among them like the rushing of subterrene water .
And they sigh one unto the other .
" But there is a boundary to their realm -- the boundary of the dark ,
horrible , lofty forest . There , like the waves about the Hebrides , the low underwood is agitated continually .
But there is no wind throughout
the heaven . And the tall primeval trees rock eternally hither and thither with a crashing and mighty sound .
And from their high summits , one by one , drop everlasting dews .
And at the roots strange poisonous flowers lie writhing in perturbed slumber .
And overhead , with a rustling and loud noise , the gray clouds rush westwardly forever , until they roll , a cataract , over the fiery wall of the horizon .
But there is no
wind throughout the heaven . And by the shores of the river Zaire there
is neither quiet nor silence . " It was night , and the rain fell ;
and falling , it was rain , but , having fallen , it was blood .
And I stood in the morass among the tall and the rain fell upon my head -- and the lilies sighed one unto the other in the
solemnity of their desolation . " And , all=at=once , the moon arose through the thin ghastly mist , and was
crimson in color . And mine eyes fell upon a huge gray rock which stood by the shore of the river , and was lighted by the light of the moon .
its front were characters engraven in the stone ; and I walked through the morass of water-lilies , until I came close unto the shore , that I might read the characters upon the stone .
But I could not decypher them .
-- and the characters were Desolation .
" And I looked upwards , and there stood a man upon the summit of the
rock ; and I hid myself among the water-lilies that I might discover the
the outlines of his figure were indistinct -- but his features were the features of a deity ;
for the mantle of the night , and of the mist , and of the moon , and of the dew , had left uncovered the features of his
face . And his brow was lofty with thought , and his eye wild with care ;
and , in the few furrows upon his cheek I read the fables of sorrow , and weariness , and disgust with mankind , and a longing after solitude .
" And the man sat upon the rock , and leaned his head upon his hand , and looked out upon the desolation .
He looked down into the low unquiet shrubbery , and up into the tall primeval trees , and up higher at the rustling heaven , and into the crimson moon .
And I lay close within shelter of the lilies , and observed the actions of the man . And the
man trembled in the solitude ;
" And the man turned his attention from the heaven , and looked out upon the dreary river Zaire , and upon the yellow ghastly waters , and upon the
lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man . And the man trembled in the solitude ;
hippopotami heard my call , and came , with the behemoth , unto the foot of the rock , and roared loudly and fearfully beneath the moon .
And I lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man .
And the man trembled in the solitude ;
-- but the night waned and he sat upon the rock .
" Then I cursed the elements with the curse of tumult ; and a frightful tempest gathered in the heaven where , before , there had been no wind . And the heaven became livid with the violence of the tempest -- and the
rain beat upon the head of the man -- and the floods of the river came down -- and the river was tormented into foam -- and the water-lilies
And I lay close within my covert and observed the actions of the man .
And the man trembled in the solitude ;
-- but the night waned and he sat upon the rock .
" Then I grew angry and cursed , with the curse of silence , the river , and the lilies , and the wind , and the forest , and the heaven , and the thunder , and the sighs of the water-lilies .
And they became accursed , and were still .
And the moon ceased to totter up its pathway to heaven -- and the thunder died away -- and the lightning did not flash -- and the clouds hung motionless -- and the waters sunk to their level and remained -- and the trees ceased to rock -- and the water-lilies sighed no more -- and the murmur was heard no=longer from among them , nor any shadow
of sound throughout the vast illimitable desert . And I looked upon the characters of the rock , and they were changed ; -- and the characters were
Silence . " And mine eyes fell upon the countenance of the man , and his countenance was wan with terror .
And , hurriedly , he raised his head from his hand , and stood forth upon the rock and listened .
But there was no voice throughout the vast illimitable desert , and the characters upon the rock
were Silence . And the man shuddered , and turned his face away , and fled afar off , in haste , so=that I beheld him no=more .
"
Now there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi -- in the iron-bound , melancholy volumes of the Magi . Therein , I say , are glorious histories
And as the Demon made an end of his story , he fell back within the cavity of the tomb and laughed .
And I could not laugh with the Demon , and he cursed me because I could not laugh . And the lynx
which dwelleth forever in the tomb , came out therefrom , and lay down at the feet of the Demon , and looked at him steadily in the face .
