The Miser Harpagon , _father to_ Cleante , _in love with_ Marianne .
Cleante , Harpagon's _son , lover to_ Marianne .
Valere , _son to_ Anselme , _and lover to_ Elise .
Anselme , _father to_ Valere _and_ Marianne .
Master Simon , _broker_ .
Master Jacques , _cook and coachman to_ Harpagon .
La=fleche , _valet to_ Cleante .
Brindavoine _and_ La=merluche , _lackeys to_ Harpagon .
A Magistrate _and his_ Clerk .
Elise , _daughter to_ Harpagon .
Marianne , _daughter to_ Anselme .
Frosine , _an intriguing woman_ .
Mistress Claude , _servant to_ Harpagon .
_The scene is at_ Paris , _in_ Harpagon's _house_ .
The Miser . Act I .
Scene I . -- Valere , Elise .
Val .
What , dear Elise ! you grow sad after having given me such dear tokens of your love ; and I see you sigh in the midst of my joy !
Can you regret having made me happy ?
and do you repent of the engagement which my love has forced from you ?
Eli . No , Valere , I do not regret what I do for you ;
I feel carried on by too delightful a power , and I do not even wish that things should be otherwise than they are .
Yet , to tell you the truth , I am very anxious about the consequences ;
What can you possibly fear from the affection you have shown me ?
Eli .
Everything ;
the anger of my father , the reproaches of my family , the censure of the world , and , above=all , Valere , a change in your heart !
I fear that cruel coldness with which your sex so often repays the too warm proofs of an innocent love .
Val . Alas !
do not wrong me thus ; do not judge of me by others .
Think me capable of everything , Elise , except of falling short=of what I owe to you .
I love you too much for that ; and my love will be as lasting as my life !
Eli . Ah !
Valere , all men say the same thing ;
Then why not wait for actions , if by them alone you can judge of the truthfulness of my heart ? Do not suffer your anxious fears to mislead you , and to wrong me . Do not let an unjust suspicion destroy the happiness which is to me dearer than life ;
Alas !
how easily do we allow ourselves to be persuaded by those we love .
I believe you , Valere ; I feel sure that your heart is utterly incapable of deceiving me , that your love is sincere , and that you will ever remain faithful to me . I will no=longer doubt that happiness is near .
If I grieve , it will only be over the difficulties of our position , and the possible censures of the world .
Val . But why even this fear ? Eli .
Oh , Valere ! if everybody knew you as I do , I should not have much to fear . I find in you enough to justify all I do for you ; my heart knows all your merit , and feels , moreover , bound to you by deep gratitude .
How can I forget that horrible moment when we met for the first-time ? Your generous courage in risking your own life to save mine from the fury of the waves ; your tender care afterwards ;
How can I resist the influence that all this has over me ? Is it not enough to justify in my eyes my engagement to you ? Yet , who knows if it will be enough to justify it in the eyes of others ? and how can I feel sure that my motives will be understood ? Val . You try in vain to find merit in what I have done ;
it is by my love alone that I trust to deserve you . As=for the scruples you feel , your father himself justifies you but too much before the world ; and his avarice and the distant way in which he lives with his children might authorise stranger things still .
Forgive me , my dear Elise , for speaking thus of your father before you ;
but you know that , unfortunately , on this subject no-good can be said of him . However , if I can find my parents , as I fully hope I shall , they will soon be favourable to us .
I am expecting news of them with great impatience ; but if none comes I will go in search of them myself .
Eli . Oh no !
You know how much I wish it , and you can see how I set about it . You know the skilful manoeuvres I have had to use in=order=to introduce myself into his service ; under what a mask of sympathy and conformity of tastes I disguise my own feelings to please him ; and what a part I play to acquire his affection .
I succeed wonderfully well , and I feel that to obtain favour with men , there are no better means than to pretend to be of their way of thinking , to fall in with their maxims , to praise their defects , and to applaud all their doings . One need not fear to overdo it , for however gross the flattery , the most cunning are easily duped ; there is nothing so impertinent or ridiculous which they will not believe , provided it be well seasoned with praise .
Honesty suffers , I acknowledge ;
but when we have need of men , we may be allowed without blame to adapt ourselves to their mode of thought ;
I am afraid I can_ _not humour them both .
The temper of the father is so different from that of the son that it would be difficult to be the confidant of both at the same time .
Rather try your brother yourself ; make use of the love that exists between you to enlist him in our cause .
I leave you , for I see him coming .
I greatly fear I shall never have the courage to speak to him of my secret . Scene II .
-- Cleante , Elise , CLE . I am very glad to find you alone , sister . I longed to speak to you and to tell you a secret .
Eli . I am quite ready to hear you , brother .
What is it you have to tell me ?
CLE . Many things , sister , summed up in one word -- love .
Eli . You love ?
CLE . Yes , I love .
But , before I say more , let me tell you that I know I depend on my father , and that the name of son subjects me to his will ;
that it would be wrong to engage ourselves without the consent of the authors of our being ; that heaven has made them the masters of our affections , and that it is our duty not to dispose of ourselves but in accordance to their wish ;
that their judgment is not biassed by their being in=love themselves ; that they are , therefore , much=more likely not to be deceived by appearances , and to judge better what is good for us ;
that we ought=to trust their experience rather=than the passion which blinds us ; and that the rashness of youth often carries us to the very brink of dangerous abysses .
I know all this , my sister , and I tell it you to spare you the trouble of saying it to me , for my love will not let me listen to anything , and I pray you to spare me your remonstrances . Eli . Have you engaged yourself , brother , to her you love ?
CLE . No , but I have determined to do so ; and I beseech you once=more not to bring forward any reason to dissuade me from it .
Eli . Am I such a very strange person , brother ?
CLE . No , dear sister ;
but you do not love . You know not the sweet power that love has upon our hearts ; and I dread your wisdom .
Eli . Alas !
my brother , let us not speak of my wisdom .
There are very few people in this world who do not lack wisdom , were it only once in their lifetime ;
and if I opened my heart to you , perhaps you would think me less wise than you are yourself .
CLE .
Ah !
would to heaven that your heart , like mine . . . Eli . Let us speak of you first , and tell me whom it is you love .
CLE . A young girl who has lately come to live in our neighbourhood , and who seems made to inspire love in all those who behold her .
Nature , my dear sister , has made nothing more lovely ; and I felt another man the moment I saw her .
Her name is Marianne , and she lives with a good , kind mother , who is almost always ill , and for whom the dear girl shows the greatest affection .
She waits upon her , pities and comforts her with a tenderness that would touch you to the very soul .
Whatever she undertakes is done in the most charming way ; and in all her actions shine a wonderful grace , a most winning gentleness , an adorable modesty , a . . .
ah !
my sister , how I wish you had but seen her .
Eli . I see many things in what you tell me , dear brother ;
I have discovered , without their knowing it , that they are not in very good circumstances , and that , although they live with the greatest care , they have barely enough to cover their expenses .
Can you imagine , my sister , what happiness it must be to improve the condition of those we love ;
Yes , I understand , dear brother , what sorrow this must be to you . CLE .
It is greater , my sister , than you can believe . For is there anything more cruel than this mean economy to which we are subjected ? this strange penury in which we are made to pine ? What good will it do us to have a fortune if it only comes to us when we are not able to enjoy it ; if now to provide for my daily maintenance I get into debt on every side ; if both you and I are reduced daily to beg the help of tradespeople in=order=to have decent clothes to wear ?
In short , I wanted to speak to you that you might help me to sound my father concerning my present feelings ; and if I find him opposed=to them , I am determined to go and live elsewhere with this most charming girl , and to make the best of what Providence offers us .
It is but too true that every day he gives us more=and=more reason to regret the death of our mother , and that . . .
CLE .
I hear his voice . Let us go a=little farther and finish our talk .
We will afterwards join our forces to make a common attack on his hard and unkind heart .
Scene III . -- Harpagon , La=fleche . HAR . Get out=of here , this moment ;
and let me have no=more of your prating . Now then , be gone out=of my house , you sworn pickpocket , you veritable gallows' bird .
What are you muttering there between your teeth ?
La FL . Why do you send me away ?
HAR . You dare to ask me my reasons , you scoundrel ?
Out with you , this moment , before I give you a good thrashing .
La FL . What have I done to you ?
HAR . Done this , that I wish you to be off .
La FL . My master , your son , gave me orders to wait for him .
HAR . Go and wait for him in the street , then ; out with you ;
do_ _n't stay in my house , straight and stiff as a sentry , to observe what is going on , and to make your profit of everything .
I will_ _n't always have before me a spy on all my affairs ;
a treacherous scamp , whose cursed eyes watch all my actions , covet all I possess , and ferret about in every corner to see if there is anything to steal .
La FL . How the deuce could one steal anything from you ?
Are you a man likely to be robbed when you put every possible thing under lock and key , and mount guard day and night ? HAR .
I will lock up whatever I think fit , and mount guard when and where I please .
Did you ever see such spies as are set upon me to take note of everything I do ? ( _Aside_ ) I tremble for fear he should suspect something of my money . ( _Aloud_ ) Now , are_ _n't you a fellow to give rise to stories about my having money hid in my house ?
La FL . You have some money hid in your house ?
HAR . No , scoundrel !
I do not say that . ( _Aside_ ) I am furious ! ( _Aloud_ ) I only ask if out=of mischief you do not spread abroad the report that I have some ?
La FL . Oh !
What does it matter whether you have money , or whether you have not , since it is all=the=same to us ?
HAR . ( _raising his hand to give_ La=fleche _a blow_ ) .
Oh ! oh !
You want to argue , do you ?
I will give you , and quickly too , some few of these arguments about your ears . Get out=of the house , I tell you once more .
La FL . Very well ;
very well . I am going . HAR . No , wait ; are you carrying anything away with you ?
La FL . What can I possibly carry away ?
HAR . Come here , and let me see .
Show me your hands . La FL .
There they are . HAR .
The others . La FL .
The others ? HAR .
Yes . La FL .
There they are .
HAR . ( _pointing to_ La=fleche's _breeches_ ) . Have you anything hid in here ?
La FL . Look for yourself .
HAR . ( _feeling the knees of the breeches_ ) . These wide knee-breeches are convenient receptacles of stolen goods ; and I wish a pair of them had been hanged .
La FL . ( _aside_ ) . Ah !
how richly such a man deserves what he fears , and what joy it would be to me to steal some of his . . .
HAR .
Eh ? La FL .
What ? HAR .
What is it you talk of stealing ? La FL .
I say that you feel about everywhere to see if I have been stealing anything . HAR .
And I mean to do so too . ( _He feels in_ La=fleche's _pockets_ ) .
La FL . Plague take all misers and all miserly ways !
HAR . Eh ?
What do you say ?
La FL . What do I say ?
HAR . Yes .
What is it you say about misers and miserly ways .
La FL . I say plague take all misers and all miserly ways .
HAR . Of whom do you speak ?
La FL . Of misers . HAR .
And who are they , these misers ?
La FL . Villains and stingy wretches !
HAR . But what do you mean by that ? La FL .
Why do you trouble yourself so much about what I say ? HAR .
I trouble myself because I think it right to do so .
La FL . Do you think I am speaking about you ?
HAR . I think what I think ; but I insist upon your telling me to whom you speak when you say that . La FL . To whom I speak ?
I am speaking to the inside of my hat .
HAR . And I will , perhaps , speak to the outside of your head . La FL . Would you prevent me from cursing misers ? HAR .
No ;
but I will prevent you from prating and from being insolent .
Hold your tongue , will you ?
La FL .
I name nobody . HAR .
Another word , and I_ _ll thrash you .
La FL . He whom the cap fits , let him wear it .
HAR . Will you be silent ?
La FL . Yes ; much against my will .
HAR . Ah !
ah !
La FL . ( _showing_ Harpagon _one of his doublet pockets_ ) . Just look , here is one more pocket .
Are you satisfied ?
HAR . Come , give it up=to me without all that fuss .
La FL . Give you what ?
HAR . What you have stolen from me .
La FL . I have stolen nothing at=all from you . HAR .
Are you telling the truth ?
La FL . Yes . HAR . Good-bye , then , and now you may go to the devil . La FL . ( _aside_ ) .
That's a nice way of dismissing anyone . HAR . I leave it to your conscience , remember !
Scene IV .
This rascally valet is a constant vexation to me ;
and I hate the very sight of the good-for-nothing cripple .
Really , it is no small anxiety to keep by one a large sum of money ;
and happy is the man who has all his cash well invested , and who needs not keep by him more=than he wants for his daily expenses .
I am not a little puzzled to find in the whole of this house a safe hiding-place .
Do_ _n't speak to me of your strong boxes , I will never trust to them .
Why , they are just the very things thieves set upon !
Scene V . -- Harpagon , Elise _and_ Cleante _are seen talking together at the back of the stage . _
HAR . ( _thinking himself alone_ . ) Meanwhile , I hardly know whether I did right to bury in my garden the ten thousand crowns which were paid to me yesterday . Ten thousand crowns in gold is a sum sufficiently . . . ( _Aside , on perceiving_ Elise _and_ Cleante _whispering together_ ) Good=heavens !
I have betrayed myself ; my warmth has carried me away .
I believe I spoke aloud while reasoning with myself . ( _To_ Cleante _and_ Elise ) What do you want ?
CLE . Nothing , father .
HAR . Have you been here long ? Eli .
We have only just come .
HAR . Did you hear . . . ?
CLE .
What , father ? HAR .
There . . . !
CLE .
What ? HAR .
What I was just now saying . CLE . No. HAR . You did .
I know you did .
Eli . I beg your pardon , father , but we did not .
HAR .
I see well enough that you overheard a=few words .
The fact is , I was only talking to myself about the trouble one has nowadays to raise any money ;
We were afraid of coming near you , for fear of intruding . HAR .
We do not wish to interfere in your affairs .
HAR . Would that I had them , these ten thousand crowns ! CLE .
I should not think that . . .
HAR . What a capital affair it would be for me . CLE .
There are things . . .
HAR .
I greatly need them . CLE .
I fancy that . . .
HAR .
It would suit me exceedingly well .
Eli . You are . . .
HAR .
And I should not have to complain , as I do now , that the times are bad .
CLE .
I am well enough off !
Those who say it are liars .
Nothing can be more false ;
and they are scoundrels who spread such reports . Eli .
Do_ _n't be angry . HAR .
It is strange that my own children betray me and become my enemies .
CLE . Is it being your enemy to say that you have wealth ?
HAR . Yes , it is .
What extravagant expenses do I indulge in ?
HAR . What !
Is there anything more scandalous than this sumptuous attire with which you jaunt it about the town ?
I was remonstrating with your sister yesterday , but you are still worse .
It cries vengeance to heaven ; and were we to calculate all you are wearing , from head to foot , we should find enough for a good annuity .
I have told you a hundred times , my son , that your manners displease me exceedingly ;
you affect the marquis terribly , and for you to be always dressed as you are , you must certainly rob me .
CLE . Rob you ?
And how ? HAR . How should I know ?
I , father ? I play ; and as I am very lucky , I spend in clothes all the money I win .
HAR . It is very wrong .
If you are lucky at play , you should profit by it , and place the money you win at decent interest , so=that you may find it again some day .
I should like to know , for=instance , without mentioning the rest , what need there is for all these ribbons with which you are decked from head to foot , and if half=a=dozen tags are not sufficient to fasten your breeches .
What necessity is there for anyone to spend money upon wigs , when we have hair of our own growth , which costs nothing .
I will lay a wager that , in wigs and ribbons alone , there are certainly twenty pistoles spent , and twenty pistoles brings in at=least eighteen livres six sous eight deniers per=annum , at only eight per=cent interest .
CLE . You are quite right .
HAR . Enough on this subject ;
let us talk of something=else . ( _Aside , noticing_ Cleante _and_ Elise , _who make signs to one another_ ) I believe they are making signs to one=another to pick my pocket . ( _Aloud_ ) What do you mean by those signs ?
Eli . We are hesitating as=to who shall speak first , for we both have something to tell you .
HAR . And I also have something to tell you both .
CLE . We wanted to speak to you about marriage , father .
HAR . The very thing I wish to speak to you about .
Eli . Ah !
my father !
HAR . What is the meaning of that exclamation ?
Is it the word , daughter , or the thing itself that frightens you ? CLE .
A=little patience , if you please .
You need not be alarmed .
I know what is good for you both , and you will have no reason to complain of anything I intend to do .
To begin at the beginning . ( _To_ Cleante ) Do you know , tell me , a young person , called Marianne , who lives not far from here ?
CLE . Yes , father .
HAR . And you ?
Eli . I have heard her spoken of .
HAR . Well , my son , and how do you like the girl ?
CLE . She is very charming .
HAR . Her face ?
CLE . Modest and intelligent .
HAR . Her air and manner ?
CLE . Perfect , undoubtedly .
HAR . Do you not think that such a girl well deserves to be thought of ?
CLE . Yes , father .
HAR . She would form a very desirable match ?
CLE . Very desirable .
HAR . That there is every likelihood of her making a thrifty and careful wife .
CLE . Certainly .
HAR . And that a husband might live very happily with her ? CLE .
I have not the least doubt about it . HAR . There is one little difficulty ;
I am afraid she has not the fortune we might reasonably expect .
CLE .
Oh , my father , riches are of little importance when one is sure of marrying a virtuous woman .
HAR . I beg your pardon .
That follows as=a=matter=of=course .
HAR . Well , I must say that I am very much pleased to find that you entirely agree with me , for her modest manner and her gentleness have won my heart ;
and I have made up my mind to marry her , provided I find she has some dowry .
CLE . Eh !
HAR . What now ?
CLE . You are resolved , you say . . . ?
HAR .
To marry Marianne .
CLE . Who ?
you ?
you ?
HAR . Yes , I , I , I.=What does all this mean ?
CLE . I feel a sudden dizziness , and I must withdraw for a little while . HAR . It will be nothing .
Go quickly into the kitchen and drink a large glass of cold water , it will soon set you all=right again .
Scene VI .
-- Harpagon , Elise . HAR .
There goes one of your effeminate fops , with no=more stamina than a chicken .
That is what I have resolved for myself , my daughter .
As=to your brother , I have thought for him of a certain widow , of whom I heard this morning ;
and you I shall give to Mr.=Anselme . Eli .
To Mr.=Anselme ? HAR .
Yes , a staid and prudent man , who is not above fifty , and of whose riches everybody speaks .
Eli . ( _curtseying_ ) . I have no wish to marry , father , if you please .
HAR . ( _imitating_ Elise ) . And I , my little girl , my darling , I wish you to marry , if you please .
Eli . ( _curtseying again_ ) . I beg your pardon , my father .
HAR . ( _again imitating_ Elise ) .
I beg your pardon , my daughter . Eli .
I am the very humble servant of Mr.=Anselme , but ( _curtseying again_ ) , with your leave , I shall not marry him .
HAR .
I am your very humble servant , but ( _again imitating_ Elise ) you will marry him this very evening .
Eli . This evening ? HAR .
This evening . Eli . ( _curtseying again_ ) .
It can_ _not be done , father .
HAR . ( _imitating_ Elise ) . It will be done , daughter .
Eli . No.
HAR . Yes .
Eli . No , I tell you .
HAR . Yes , I tell you .
Eli . You will never force me to do such a thing
HAR . I will force you to it . Eli .
I had rather kill myself than marry such a man . HAR .
You will not kill yourself , and you will marry him .
But did you ever see such impudence ?
Did ever any one hear a daughter speak in such a fashion to her father ?
Eli . But did ever anyone see a father marry his daughter after such a fashion ?
HAR . It is a match against which nothing can be said , and I am perfectly sure that everybody will approve of my choice .
Eli . And I know that it will be approved of by no reasonable person .
HAR . ( _seeing_ Valere ) . There is Valere coming .
Shall we make him judge in this affair ?
Eli . Willingly .
HAR . You will abide by what he says ? Eli .
Yes , whatever he thinks right , I will do . HAR .
Agreed . Scene VII .
-- Valere , Harpagon , Elise . HAR .
Valere , we have chosen you to decide who is in the right , my daughter or I .
Val . It is certainly you , Sir . HAR .
But have you any idea of what we are talking about ? Val .
No ; but you could not be in the wrong ; you are reason itself .
HAR . I want to give her to-night , for a husband , a man as rich as he is good ; and the hussy tells me to my face that she scorns to take him .
What do you say to that ?
Val . What I say to it ?
HAR .
Yes ?
Val .
Eh !
eh !
HAR . What ?
Val . I say that I am , upon the whole , of your opinion , and that you can_ _not but be right ; yet , perhaps , she is not altogether wrong ; and . . . HAR . How so ? Mr.=Anselme is an excellent match ; he is a nobleman , and a gentleman too ; of simple habits , and extremely well-off . He has no children left from his first marriage .
Could she meet with anything more suitable ?
Val . It is true .
But she might say that you are going rather fast , and that she ought=to have at=least a little time to consider whether her inclination could reconcile itself to . . .
HAR .
It is an opportunity I must not allow to slip through my fingers .
I find an advantage here which I should not find elsewhere , and he agrees to take her without dowry .
Val . Without dowry ?
HAR . Yes .
Val . Ah !
I have nothing more to say .
A more convincing reason could not be found ;
and she must yield to that . HAR .
It is a considerable saving to me .
Val . Undoubtedly ;
this admits of no contradiction .
It is true that your daughter might represent to you that marriage is a more serious affair than people are apt to believe ;
that the happiness or misery of a whole life depends on it , and that an engagement which is to last till death ought not to be entered into without great consideration .
HAR .
Without dowry ! Val .
That must of=course decide everything .
Without dowry !
Val .
Ah ! it must be granted that there is no reply to that ;
who in the world could think otherwise ?
I do not mean to say but that there are many fathers who would set a much higher value on the happiness of their daughter than on the money they may have to give for their marriage ;
who would not like to sacrifice them to their own interests , and who would , above=all things , try to see in a marriage that sweet conformity of tastes which is a sure pledge of honour , tranquillity and joy ; and that . . .
HAR .
Without dowry !
Val . That is true ;
nothing more can be said .
Without dowry .
How can anyone resist such arguments ?
HAR . ( _aside , looking towards the garden_ ) .
Ah ! I fancy I hear a dog barking .
Is anyone after my money . ( _To_ Valere ) Stop here , I_ _ll come back directly .
Scene VIII . -- Elise , Valere . Eli .
Surely , Valere , you are not in earnest when you speak to him in that manner ?
Val . I do it that I may not vex him , and the better to secure my ends .
To resist him boldly would simply spoil everything .
There are certain people who are only to be managed by indirect means , temperaments averse from all resistance , restive natures whom truth causes to rear , who always kick when we would lead them on the right road of reason , and who can only be led by a way opposed=to that by which you wish them to go .
Pretend to comply with his wishes ;
you are much=more likely to succeed in the end , and . . .
Eli .
But this marriage , Valere ? Val .
We will find some pretext for breaking it off .
Eli . But what pretext can we find if it is to be concluded to-night ? Val .
You must ask to have it delayed , and must feign some illness or other .
Eli . But he will soon discover the truth if they call in the doctor .
Val . Not a=bit of it .
Do you imagine that a doctor understands what he is about ?
Nonsense !
Do_ _n't be afraid . Believe me , you may complain of any disease you please , the doctor will be at no loss to explain to you from what it proceeds .
Scene IX -- Harpagon , Elise , Valere .
HAR . ( _alone , at the farther end of the stage_ ) .
It is nothing , thank heaven ! Val . ( _not seeing_ Harpagon ) .
and if your love , dear Elise , is as strong as . . . ( _Seeing_ Harpagon ) Yes , a daughter is bound to obey her father .
She has no right to inquire what a husband offered to her is like , and when the most important question , « without dowry , » presents itself , she should accept anybody that is given her .
HAR . Good ;
that was beautifully said !
Val . I beg your pardon , Sir , if I carry it a little too far , and take upon myself to speak to her as I do .
HAR .
Why , I am delighted , and I wish you to have her entirely under your control . ( _To_ Elise ) Yes , you may run away as much as you like . I give him all the authority over you that heaven has given me , and I will have you do all that he tells you .
Val . After that , resist all my expostulations , if you can .
Scene X . -- Harpagon , Valere . Val .
I will follow her , Sir , if you will allow me , and will continue the lecture I was giving her .
HAR . Yes , do so ;
you will oblige me greatly . Val .
She ought=to be kept in with a tight hand . HAR .
Quite true , you must . . . .
Val . Do not be afraid ;
I believe I shall end by convincing her . HAR . Do so , do so .
I am going to take a short stroll in the town , and I will come back again presently .
Val . ( _going towards the door through which_ Elise _left , and speaking as=if it were to her_ ) .
Yes , money is more precious than anything=else in the world , and you should thank heaven that you have so worthy a man for a father .
He knows what life is .
When a man offers to marry a girl without a dowry , we ought=to look no farther .
Everything is comprised in that , and « without dowry » compensates for=want=of beauty , youth , birth , honour , wisdom , and probity .
HAR . Ah !
the honest fellow !
he speaks like an oracle .
Happy is he who can secure such a servant ! Act II .
Scene I . -- Cleante , La=fleche . CLE . How now , you rascal !
where have you been hiding ?
Did I not give you orders to . . . ?
La FL .
How is our affair progressing ?
Things are worse than ever for us , and since I left you , I have discovered that my own father is my rival .
La FL . Your father in=love ? CLE .
It seems so ; and I found it very difficult to hide from him what I felt at such a discovery .
La FL . He meddling with love !
What the deuce is he thinking of ?
Does he mean to set everybody at defiance ?
And is love made for people of his build ? CLE .
It is to punish me for my sins that this passion has entered his head . La FL .
But why do you hide your love from him ? CLE .
That he may not suspect anything , and to make it more easy for me to fall-back , if=need=be , upon some device to prevent this marriage .
What answer did you receive ?
Then the affair will_ _n't come off ?
La FL . Excuse me ;
Mr.=Simon , the broker who was recommended to us , is a very active and zealous fellow , and says he has left no stone unturned to help you .
He assures me that your looks alone have won his heart .
CLE . Shall I have the fifteen thousand francs which I want ?
La FL . Yes , but under certain trifling conditions , which you must accept if you wish the bargain to be concluded .
CLE . Did you speak to the man who is to lend the money ? La FL . Oh !
dear no. Things are not done in that way .
He is still more anxious than you to remain unknown .
These things are greater mysteries than you think . His name is not by any means to be divulged , and he is to be introduced to you to-day at a house provided by him , so=that he may hear from yourself all about your position and your family ;
Particularly as my mother is dead , and they can_ _not deprive me of what I inherit from her . La FL .
There is nothing to say against that .
Five=and=a=half per=cent ?
By=Jove , that_ _s honest ! We have nothing to complain of .
La FL . That's true .
" But as the said lender has not in hand the sum required , and as , in order to oblige the borrower , he is himself obliged to borrow from another at the rate of twenty per=cent . , it is but right that the said first borrower shall pay this interest , without detriment to the rest ;
since it is only to oblige him that the said lender is himself forced to borrow .
" CLE .
The deuce ! What a Jew !
what a Turk we have here !
That is more than twenty-five per=cent .
La FL . That's true ;
and it is the remark I made . It is for you to consider the matter before you act . CLE . How can I consider ?
I want the money , and I must therefore accept everything .
La FL . That is exactly what I answered .
CLE . Is there anything=else ?
What is the meaning of all that ?
La FL . I_ _ll go through the catalogue : --
" Firstly : -- A fourpost bedstead , with hangings of Hungary lace very elegantly trimmed with olive-coloured cloth , and six chairs and a counterpane to match ; the whole in very good condition , and lined with soft red and blue shot-silk .
CLE . What does he want me to do with all this ?
La FL . Wait .
" Item : -- Tapestry hangings representing the loves of Gombaud and Macee . [ 1 ] Item : -- A large walnut table with twelve columns or turned legs , which draws out at both ends , and is provided beneath with six stools .
"
CLE . Hang it all !
What am I to do with all this ? La FL .
Have patience . " Item : -- Three large matchlocks inlaid with mother-of-pearl , with rests to correspond .
You will drive me crazy .
La FL . Gently !
" Item : -- A Bologna lute with all its strings , or nearly all .
Item : -- A pigeon-hole table and a draught-board , and a game of mother goose , restored from the Greeks , most useful to pass the time when one has nothing to do .
Item : -- A lizard's skin , three feet and a half in length , stuffed with hay , a pleasing curiosity to hang on the ceiling of a room .
Let the plague choke him with his considerateness , the wretch , the cut-throat that he is !
Did ever anyone hear of such usury ?
Is he not satisfied with the outrageous interest he asks that he must force me to take , instead=of the three thousand francs , all the old rubbish which he picks up .
I shall_ _n't get two-hundred crowns for=all=that , and yet I must bring myself to yield to all his wishes ;
I see you , Sir , if you_ _ll forgive my saying so , on the high-road followed by Panurge [ 2 ] to ruin himself -- taking money in advance , buying dear , selling cheap , and cutting your corn while it is still grass .
CLE . What would you have me do ?
It is to this that young men are reduced by the accursed avarice of their fathers ; and people are astonished after that , that sons long for their death .
La FL . No=one can deny that yours would excite against his meanness the most quiet of men .
CLE . Give me that memorandum that I may have another look at it . Scene II .
-- Harpagon , Mr . Simon ( Cleante _and_ La=fleche _at the back of the stage_ ) . Sim . Yes , Sir ; it is a young man who is greatly in want of money ;
But are you sure , Mr.=Simon , that there is no risk to run in this case ?
No ; I can_ _not tell you anything for certain , as it was by mere chance that I was made acquainted with him ; but he will tell you everything himself , and his servant has assured me that you will be quite satisfied when you know who he is .
All I can tell you is that his family is said to be very wealthy , that he has already lost his mother , and that he will pledge you his word , if you insist upon it , that his father will die before eight months are passed .
HAR . That is something .
Charity , Mr.=Simon , demands of us to gratify people whenever we have it in our power .
Sim . Evidently .
La FL . ( _aside to_ Cleante , _on recognising_ Mr . Simon ) . What does this mean ?
Mr.=Simon talking with your father !
CLE . ( _aside to_ La=fleche ) .
Has he been told who I am , and would you be capable of betraying me ?
Sim . ( _to_ Cleante _and_ La=fleche ) .
Ah !
you are in good time !
But who told you to come here ? ( _To_ Harpagon ) It was certainly not I who told them your name and address ;
but I am of opinion that there is no great harm done ;
they are people who can be trusted , and you can come to some understanding together .
HAR . What !
is it you who abandon yourself to such excesses ? CLE . What !
father ! is it you who stoop to such shameful deeds ? ( Mr .
Simon _runs away , and_ La=fleche _hides himself_ . )
Scene III . -- Harpagon , Cleante . HAR .
So it is you who seek to enrich yourself by such criminal usury ! HAR .
And you dare , after that , to show yourself before me ?
CLE . And you dare , after that , to show yourself to the world ? HAR .
Are you not ashamed , tell me , to descend to these wild excesses , to rush headlong into frightful expenses , and disgracefully to dissipate the wealth which your parents have amassed with so much toil .
CLE . Are you not ashamed of dishonouring your station by such dealings , of sacrificing honour and reputation to the insatiable desire of heaping crown upon crown , and of outdoing the most infamous devices that have ever been invented by the most notorious usurers ?
HAR . Get out=of my sight , you reprobate ; get out=of my sight !
Begone , I say , and do not provoke me to anger . ( _Alone_ ) After all , I am not very much vexed at this adventure ;
it will be a lesson to me to keep a better watch over all his doings .
Scene IV . -- Frosine , Harpagon .
Fro . Sir .
HAR .
Wait a moment , I will come back and speak to you . ( _Aside_ ) I had better go and see a little after my money .
Scene V . -- La=fleche , Frosine . La FL . ( _without seeing_ Frosine ) . The adventure is most comical .
Hidden somewhere he must have a large store of goods of all kinds , for the list did not contain one single article which either of us recognised .
Fro . Hallo !
is it you , my poor La=Fleche ?
How is it we meet here ?
La FL . Ah ! ah !
it is you , Frosine ;
and what have you come to do here ? Fro .
What have I come to do ? Why ! what I do everywhere else , busy myself about other people's affairs , make myself useful to the community in general , and profit as=much=as I possibly can by the small talent I possess .
Must we not live by our wits in this world ? and what other resources have people like me but intrigue and cunning ?
La FL . Have you , then , any business with the master of this house ? Fro .
Yes . I am transacting for him a certain small matter for which he is pretty sure to give me a reward . La FL .
He give you a reward !
Ah ! ah !
That may be , but there are certain services which wonderfully touch our feelings .
La FL . Your humble servant ; but as=yet you do_ _n't know Harpagon .
Harpagon is the human being of all human beings the least humane , the mortal of all mortals the hardest and closest .
There is no service great enough to induce him to open his purse .
If , indeed , you want praise , esteem , kindness , and friendship , you are welcome to any amount ; but money , that_ _s a different affair .
That's all very well ;
but I know the art of fleecing men . I have a secret of touching their affections by flattering their hearts , and of finding out their weak points .
La FL . All useless here .
I defy you to soften , as=far=as money is concerned , the man we are speaking of .
He is a Turk on that point , of a Turkishness to drive anyone to despair , and we might starve in his presence and never a peg would he stir .
In short , he loves money better than reputation , honour , and virtue , and the mere sight of anyone making demands upon his purse sends him into convulsions ;
But here he comes again ;
I leave you . Scene VI .
-- Harpagon , Frosine . HAR . ( _aside_ ) .
Fro .
Bless me , how well you look ! You are the very picture of health .
HAR . Who ?
I ? Fro .
Never have I seen you looking more rosy , more hearty . HAR .
Are you in earnest ?
Fro . Why !
you have never been so young in your life ; and I know many a man of twenty-five who looks much older than you do .
HAR . And yet , Frosine , I have passed threescore . Fro .
Threescore ! Well , and what then ?
You do_ _n't mean to make a trouble of that , do you ?
It_ _s the very flower of manhood , the threshold of the prime of life .
HAR . True ;
but twenty years less would do me no harm , I think .
Fro . Nonsense !
You_ _ve no need of that , and you are of a build to last out a hundred .
HAR . Do you really think so ?
Fro . Decidedly .
You have all the appearance of it .
Hold yourself up a little .
Ah !
what a sign of long life is that line there straight between your two eyes !
HAR . You know all about that , do you ? Fro .
I should think I do .
Show me your hand . [ 3 ] [ Footnote : Frosine professes a knowledge of palmistry . ] Dear me , what a line of life there is there !
HAR .
Where ?
Fro .
Do_ _n't you see how far this line goes ?
HAR .
Well , and what does it mean ?
Fro . What does it mean ?
There . . .
I said a hundred years ;
but no , it is one hundred and twenty I ought=to have said .
HAR . Is it possible ? Fro .
I tell you they will have to kill you , and you will bury your children and your children's children .
HAR . So much the better !
And what news of our affair ?
Fro . Is there any need to ask ?
Did ever anyone see me begin anything and not succeed in it ?
I have , especially for matchmaking , the most wonderful talent .
There are no two persons in the world I could not couple together ;
and I believe that , if I took it into my head , I could make the Grand=Turk marry the Republic=of=Venice . [ 4 ] But we had , to be sure , no=such difficult thing to achieve in this matter .
As I know the ladies very well , I told them every particular about you ;
and I acquainted the mother with your intentions towards Marianne since you saw her pass in the street and enjoy the fresh air out=of her window .
HAR . What did she answer . . . ?
Fro .
She received your proposal with great joy ;
and when I told her that you wished very much that her daughter should come to-night to assist at the marriage contract which is to be signed for your own daughter , she assented at=once , and entrusted her to me for the purpose .
You are quite right .
She is to come after=dinner to pay a visit to your daughter ; then she means to go from here to the fair , and return to your house just in time for supper . HAR . That will do very well ;
they shall go together in my carriage , which I will lend them . Fro .
That will suit her perfectly .
HAR . But I say , Frosine , have you spoken to the mother about the dowry she can give her daughter ?
Did you make her understand that under such circumstances she ought=to do her utmost and to make a great sacrifice ?
For , after all , one does not marry a girl without her bringing something with her . Fro .
How something !
She is a girl who will bring you a clear twelve thousand francs a year ?
HAR . Twelve thousand francs a year ?
Fro . Yes !
To=begin=with , she has been nursed and brought up with the strictest notions of frugality . She is a girl accustomed to live upon salad , milk , cheese , and apples , and who consequently will require neither a well served up table , nor any rich broth , nor your everlasting peeled barley ; none , in short , of all those delicacies that another woman would want .
This is no small matter , and may well amount to three thousand francs yearly . Besides this , she only cares for simplicity and neatness ;
she will have none of those splendid dresses and rich jewels , none of that sumptuous furniture in which girls like her indulge so extravagantly ; and this item is worth more than four thousand francs per=annum .
Lastly , she has the deepest aversion to gambling ; and this is not very common nowadays among women . Why , I know of one in our neighbourhood who lost at=least twenty thousand francs this year .
But let us reckon only a fourth of that sum .
Yes , that_ _s not bad ; but , after all , that calculation has nothing real in it .
Fro . Excuse me ;
It is a farce to pretend to make up a dowry with all the expenses she will not run into .
I could not give a receipt for what I do not receive ; and I must decidedly get something .
Fro . Bless me !
We shall have to see to that .
But , Frosine , there is one more thing that makes me uneasy .
The girl is young , you know ;
and young people generally like those who are young like themselves , and only care for the society of the young .
I am afraid that a man of my age may not exactly suit her taste , and that this may occasion in my family certain complications that would in nowise be pleasant to me .
Fro .
Oh , how badly you judge her !
This is one more peculiarity of which I had to speak to you . She has the greatest detestation to all young men , and only likes old people .
HAR . Does she ?
Fro .
I should like you to hear her talk on that subject ;
she can_ _not bear at=all the sight of a young man , and nothing delights her more than to see a fine old man with a venerable beard .
The oldest are to her the most charming , and I warn you beforehand not to go and make yourself any younger than you really are .
She wishes for one sixty years old at=least ; and it is not more=than six months ago that on the very eve of being married she suddenly broke off the match on learning that her lover was only fifty-six years of age , and did not put on spectacles to sign the contract .
HAR . Only for that ?
Fro . Yes ;
she says there is no pleasure with a man of fifty-six ;
and she has a decided affection for those who wear spectacles .
HAR . Well , this is quite new to me .
Fro . No=one can imagine how far she carries this .
She has in her room a=few pictures and engravings , and what do you imagine they are ?
An Adonis , a Cephalus , a Paris , an Apollo ?
Not a=bit of it !
I should never have guessed such a thing ;
and I am very pleased to hear that she has such taste as this .
Indeed had I been a woman , I should never have loved young fellows .
Fro . I should think not .
Fine trumpery indeed , these young men , for any one to fall in=love with .
Fine jackanapes and puppies for a woman to hanker after .
I should like to know what relish anyone can find in them ? HAR .
Truly ; I do_ _n't understand it myself , and I can_ _not make out how it is that some women dote so=on them .
Fro . They must be downright idiots .
Can any one be in his senses who thinks youth amiable ?
Can those curly-pated coxcombs be men , and can one really get attached to such animals ?
HAR . Exactly what I say every-day !
With their effeminate voices , their three little bits of a beard turned up like cat's whiskers , their tow wigs , their flowing breeches and open breasts !
Fro . Yes ;
they are famous guys compared with yourself .
In you we see something like a man .
There is enough to satisfy the eye .
It is thus that one should be made and dressed to inspire love . HAR .
Then you think I am pretty well ?
Fro . Pretty well ! I should think so ;
you are charming , and your face would make a beautiful picture . Turn round a little , if you please .
I have nothing the matter to speak of , I am thankful to say . It is only my cough , which returns from time to time . [ 5 ]
Tell me , Frosine , has Marianne seen me yet ?
Has she not noticed me when I passed by ? Fro . No ;
You did right , and I thank you very much for it .
Fro . I have , Sir , a small request to make to you .
I am in danger of losing a lawsuit for=want=of a=little money ( Harpagon _looks grave_ ) , and you can easily help me with it , if you have pity upon me . You can_ _not imagine how happy she will be to see you . ( Harpagon _looks joyful_ .
) Oh !
how sure you are to please her , and how sure that antique ruff of yours is to produce a wonderful effect on her mind .
But , above=all , she will be delighted with your breeches fastened to your doublet with tags ;
You send me into raptures , Frosine , by saying that .
Fro . I tell you the truth , Sir ;
this lawsuit is of the utmost importance for me . ( Harpagon _looks serious again_ .
but a very small sum will save me . I should like you to have seen the happiness she felt when I spoke of you to her . ( Harpagon _looks pleased again_ .
) Joy sparkled in her eyes while I told her of all your good qualities ; and I succeeded , in short , in making her look forward with the greatest impatience to the conclusion of the match .
I beg of you , Sir , to grant me the little assistance I ask of you . ( Harpagon _again looks grave_ .
Good-bye ;
I must go and finish my correspondence .
Fro . I assure you , Sir , that you could not help me in a more pressing necessity .
HAR . I will see that my carriage is ready to take you to the fair . Fro .
I would not importune you so if I were not compelled by necessity .
HAR . And I will see that we have supper early , so=that nobody may be ill .
Fro . Do not refuse me the service ; I beg of you .
You can hardly believe , Sir , the pleasure that . . . HAR .
I must go ;
somebody is calling me .
We shall see each=other again by and by .
Fro . ( _alone_ ) .
May the fever seize you , you stingy cur , and send you to the devil and his angels !
The miser has held out against all my attacks ;
but I must not drop the negotiation ;
Here , come here , all of you ; I must give you orders for by and by , and arrange what each one will have to do .
Come nearer , Dame Claude ;
let us begin with you . ( _Looking at her broom . _ ) Good ; you are ready armed , I see .
To you I commit the care of cleaning up everywhere ;
but , above=all , be very careful not to rub the furniture too hard , for fear of wearing it out .
Besides this , I put the bottles under your care during supper , and if any one of them is missing , or if anything gets broken , you will be responsible for it , and pay it out=of your wages .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . A shrewd punishment that .
HAR . ( _to_ Dame=claude . ) Now you may go .
Scene II . -- Harpagon , Cleante , Elise , Valere , Master Jacques , Brindavoine , La=merluche . HAR . To you , Brindavoine , and to you , La=Merluche , belongs the duty of washing the glasses , and of giving to drink , but only when people are thirsty , and not according=to the custom of certain impertinent lackeys , who urge them to drink , and put the idea into their heads when they are not thinking about it .
Wait until you have been asked several times , and remember always to have plenty=of water .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . Yes ; wine without water gets into one's head .
La Mer . Shall we take off our smocks , Sir ?
HAR . Yes , when you see the guests coming ;
You know , Sir , that one of the fronts of my doublet is covered with a large stain of oil from the lamp .
La Mer .
And I , Sir , that my breeches are all torn behind , and that , saving your presence . . . HAR . ( _to_ La=merluche ) . Peace !
Turn carefully towards the wall , and always face the company . ( _To_ Brindavoine , _showing him how he is to hold his hat before his doublet , to hide the stain of oil_ ) And you , always hold your hat in this fashion when you wait on the guests .
As=for you , my daughter , you will look after all that is cleared off the table , and see that nothing is wasted : this care is very becoming to young girls .
Meanwhile get ready to welcome my lady-love , who is coming this afternoon to pay you a visit , and will take you off to the fair with her .
Do you understand what I say ?
Eli . Yes , father .
And you , my young dandy of a son to whom I have the kindness of forgiving what happened this morning , mind you do_ _n't receive her coldly , or show her a sour face . CLE . Receive her coldly !
And why should I ?
HAR . Why ?
why ? We know pretty well the ways of children whose fathers marry again , and the looks they give to those we call stepmothers .
To speak the truth , father , I can_ _not promise you that I am very happy to see her become my stepmother ; but as=to receiving her properly , and as=to giving her a kind welcome , I promise to obey you in that to the very letter .
HAR . Be careful you do , at=least .
CLE . You will see that you have no cause to complain . HAR .
You will do wisely . Scene V .
-- Harpagon , Valere , Master Jacques . HAR .
Valere , you will have to give me your help in this business .
Now , Master Jacques , I kept you for the last .
JAC . Is it to your coachman , Sir , or to your cook you want to speak , for I am both the one and the other ?
HAR . To both . JAC .
But to which of the two first ?
HAR . To the cook . JAC .
Then wait a minute , if you please .
( Jacques _takes off his stable-coat and appears dressed as a cook . _ ) HAR .
What the deuce is the meaning of this ceremony ? JAC .
Now I am at your service .
HAR . I have engaged myself , Master Jacques , to give a supper to-night .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . Wonderful !
HAR . Tell me , can you give us a good supper ?
JAC . Yes , if you give me plenty=of money .
HAR . The deuce !
Always money !
I think they have nothing=else to say except money , money , money !
Always that same word in their mouth , money !
They always speak of money !
It_ _s their pillow companion , money !
Val . Never did I hear such an impertinent answer !
Would you call it wonderful to provide good cheer with plenty=of money ?
Is it not the easiest thing in the world ?
The most stupid could do as much . But a clever man should talk of a good supper with little money .
JAC . A good supper with little money ?
Val . Yes .
JAC . ( _to_ Valere ) . Indeed , Mr.=Steward , you will oblige me greatly by telling me your secret , and also , if you like , by filling my place as cook ;
for you keep on meddling here , and want to be everything .
HAR . Hold your tongue .
What shall we want ?
JAC . Ask that of Mr.=Steward , who will give you good cheer with little money .
HAR . Do you hear ?
I am speaking to you , and expect you to answer me .
JAC . How many will there be at your table ?
HAR . Eight or ten ;
but you must only reckon for eight .
When there is enough for eight , there is enough for ten . Val .
That is evident .
JAC .
Very well , then ;
you must have four tureens of soup and five side dishes ;
soups , entrees . . . HAR .
What !
do you mean to feed a whole town ?
JAC . Roast . . .
HAR . ( _clapping his hand on_ Master Jacques' _mouth_ ) . Ah !
Wretch !
you are eating up all my substance . JAC . Entremets . . . HAR . ( _again putting his hand on_ Jacques' _mouth_ ) .
More still ?
Val . ( _to_ Jacques ) . Do you mean to kill everybody ?
And has your master invited people in=order=to destroy them with over-feeding ?
Go and read a little the precepts of health , and ask the doctors if there is anything so hurtful to man as excess in eating .
HAR . He is perfectly right .
Val . Know , Master Jacques , you and people like you , that a table overloaded with eatables is a real cut-throat ; that , to be the true friends of those we invite , frugality should reign throughout the repast we give , and that according=to the saying of one of the ancients , « We=must=eat=to=live,=and=not=live=to=eat . »
HAR . Ah !
How well the man speaks !
Come near , let me embrace you for this last saying .
It is the finest sentence that I have ever heard in my life : « We must live to eat , and not eat to live . »
No ;
that is_ _n't it .
How do you say it ?
Val . That we must eat to live , and not live to eat .
HAR . ( _to_ Master Jacques ) .
Yes .
Do you hear that ? ( _To_ Valere ) Who is the great man who said that ? Val .
I do not exactly recollect his name just now .
HAR . Remember to write down those words for me .
I will have them engraved in letters of gold over the mantel-piece of my dining-room .
Val . I will not fail . As=for your supper , you had better let me manage it .
I will see that it is all as it should be . HAR . Do so . JAC .
So much the better ;
all the less work for me . HAR . ( _to_ Valere ) .
We must have some of those things of which it is not possible to eat much , and that satisfy directly . Some good fat beans , and a pate well stuffed with chestnuts .
Val . Trust to me .
HAR . Now , Master Jacques , you must clean my carriage . JAC .
Wait a moment ;
this is to the coachman . ( Jacques _puts on his coat .
_ ) You say . . .
HAR .
That you must clean my carriage , and have my horses ready to drive to the fair .
JAC . Your horses !
Upon my word , Sir , they are not at=all in a condition to stir .
I will_ _n't tell you that they are laid up , for the poor things have got nothing to lie upon , and it would not be telling the truth .
But you make them keep such rigid fasts that they are nothing but phantoms , ideas , and mere shadows of horses .
HAR . They are much to be pitied .
They have nothing to do .
JAC . And because they have nothing to do , must they have nothing to eat ?
It would be much better for them , poor things , to work much and eat to correspond . It breaks my heart to see them so reduced ; for , in short , I love my horses ;
No , Sir . I have_ _n't the heart to drive them ;
it would go too much against my conscience to use the whip to them in the state they are in .
How could you expect them to drag a carriage ?
They have not even strength enough to drag themselves along .
Val . Sir , I will ask our neighbour , Picard , to drive them ; particularly as we shall want his help to get the supper ready .
JAC . Be it so .
I had much rather they should die under another's hand than under mine .
Val . Master Jacques is mightily considerate .
JAC . Mr.=Steward is mightily indispensable . HAR . Peace .
JAC . Sir , I can_ _n't bear these flatteries , and I can see that , whatever this man does , his continual watching after the bread , wine , wood , salt , and candles , is done but to curry favour and to make his court to you . I am indignant to see it all ;
and I am sorry to hear every-day what is said of you ;
for , after all , I have a certain tenderness for you ;
And I would know from you , Master Jacques , what it is that is said of me . JAC .
Yes , certainly , Sir , if I were sure you would not get angry with me .
HAR . No , no ; never fear .
JAC . Excuse me , but I am sure you will be angry . HAR . No , on=the=contrary , you will oblige me .
I should be glad to know what people say of me . JAC . Since you wish it , Sir , I will tell you frankly that you are the laughing-stock of everybody ;
that they taunt us everywhere by a thousand jokes on your account , and that nothing delights people more than to make sport of you , and to tell stories without end about your stinginess .
One says that you have special almanacks printed , where you double the ember days and vigils , so=that you may profit by the fasts to which you bind all your house ; another , that you always have a ready-made quarrel for your servants at Christmas time or when they leave you , so=that you may give them nothing .
One tells a story how not long=since you prosecuted a neighbour's cat because it had eaten up the remainder of a leg of mutton ;
another says that one night you were caught stealing your horses' oats , and that your coachman , -- that is the man who was before me , -- gave you , in the dark , a good sound drubbing , of which you said nothing .
In short , what is the use of going on ?
We can go nowhere but we are sure to hear you pulled to pieces . You are the butt and jest and byword of everybody ; and never does anyone mention you but under the names of miser , stingy , mean , niggardly fellow and usurer .
HAR . ( _beating_ Jacques ) . You are a fool , a rascal , a scoundrel , and an impertinent wretch . JAC .
There , there !
Did not I know how it would be ?
You would not believe me .
I told you I should make you angry if I spoke the truth ?
HAR . Learn how to speak . Scene VI .
S'death ! Mr.=Upstart , you who assume the man of consequence , it is no business of yours as=far=as I can see .
Laugh at your own cudgelling when you get it , and do_ _n't come here and laugh at mine .
Val . Ah !
Master Jacques , do_ _n't get into a passion , I beg of you .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) .
He is drawing in his horns .
I will put on a bold face , and if he is fool enough to be afraid of me , I will pay him back somewhat . ( _To_ Valere ) Do you know , Mr.=Grinner , that I am not exactly in a laughing humour , and that if you provoke me too much , I shall make you laugh after another fashion . ( Jacques _pushes_ Valere _to the farther end of the stage , threatening him_ .
) Val .
Gently , gently . JAC . How gently ? And if it does not please me to go gently ?
Val .
Come , come !
What are you about ? JAC . You are an impudent rascal .
Val . Master Jacques . . . .
JAC . None of your Master Jacques here !
If I take up a stick , I shall soon make you feel it .
Val . What do you mean by a stick ? ( _Drives back_ Jacques _in his turn_ . ) JAC . No ;
I do_ _n't say anything about that .
Val . Do you know , Mr.=Conceit , that I am a man to give you a drubbing in good earnest ?
JAC . I have no doubt of it .
Val . That , after all , you are nothing but a scrub of a cook ?
JAC . I know it very well .
Val . And that you do_ _n't know me yet ? JAC .
I beg your pardon .
Val . You will beat me , you say ?
JAC . I only spoke in jest . Val .
I do_ _n't like your jesting , and ( _beating_ Jacques ) remember that you are but a sorry hand at it .
JAC . ( _alone_ ) .
Plague take all sincerity ;
it is a bad trade . I give it up for the future , and will cease to tell the truth . It is all very well for my master to beat me ;
I will be revenged on him if I can .
Scene VII . -- Marianne , Frosine , Master Jacques . Fro . Do you know if your master is at-home ?
JAC . Yes , he is indeed ; I know it but too well .
Fro . Tell him , please , that we are here .
Scene VIII . -- Marianne , Frosine . Mar .
Why should you ?
What can you possibly dread ?
Mar . Alas !
can you ask me ?
Can you not understand the alarms of a person about to see the instrument of torture to which she is to be tied .
it is a thing I do not wish to deny . The respectful visits he has paid at our house have left , I confess , a great impression on my heart .
Fro . But do you know who he is ? Mar .
No , I do not . All I know is that he is made to be loved ; that if things were left to my choice , I would much rather marry him than any other , and that he adds not a little to the horrible dread that I have of the husband they want to force upon me .
Fro . Oh yes !
All those dandies are very pleasant , and can talk agreeably enough , but most of them are as poor as church mice ;
and it is much better for you to marry an old husband , who gives you plenty of money .
I fully acknowledge that the senses somewhat clash with the end I propose , and that there are certain little inconveniences to be endured with such a husband ; but all that will_ _n't last ; and his death , believe me , will soon put you in a position to take a more pleasant husband , who will make amends for all .
Mar . Oh , Frosine !
What a strange state of things that , in=order=to be happy , we must look forward to the death of another .
Yet death will not fall in with all the projects we make .
Fro . You are joking .
You marry him with the express understanding that he will soon leave you a widow ; it must be one of the articles of the marriage contract .
It would be very wrong in him not to die before three months are over .
Here he is himself .
Mar . Ah !
dear Frosine , what a face !
Scene IX . -- Harpagon , Marianne , Frosine . HAR . ( _to_ Marianne ) .
but , still , it is with glasses that we look at the stars , and I maintain and uphold that you are a star , the most beautiful and in the land of stars .
Frosine , she does not answer , star , it seems to me , shows no joy at the sight of me .
Fro . It is because she is still quite awe-struck , and young girls are always shy at=first , and afraid of showing what they feel .
HAR . ( _to_ Frosine ) .
You are right . ( _To_ Marianne ) My pretty darling , there is my daughter coming to welcome you .
Scene X . -- Harpagon , Elise , Marianne , Frosine . Mar . I am very late in acquitting myself of the visit I owed you .
Eli . You have done what I ought=to have done .
It was for me to have come and seen you first .
HAR . You see what a great girl she is ;
but ill weeds grow apace . Mar . ( _aside to_ Frosine ) .
Oh , what an unpleasant man !
HAR . ( _to_ Frosine ) . What does my fair one say ?
Fro . That she thinks you perfect .
HAR . You do me too much honour , my adorable darling .
Mar . ( _aside_ ) .
What a dreadful creature ! HAR . I really feel too grateful to you for these sentiments .
Mar . ( _aside_ ) . I can bear it no=longer .
Here is my son , who also comes to pay his respects to you . Mar . ( _aside to_ Frosine ) . Oh , Frosine !
what a strange meeting ! He is the very one of whom I spoke to you .
Fro . ( _to_ Marianne ) . Well , that is extraordinary .
HAR . You are surprised to see that my children can be so old ; but I shall soon get rid of both of them .
CLE . ( _to_ Marianne ) . Madam , to tell you the truth , I little expected such an event ;
and my father surprised me not a little when he told me to-day of the decision he had come to . Mar .
I can say the same thing . It is an unexpected meeting ;
and I certainly was far from being prepared for such an event . CLE . Madam , my father can_ _not make a better choice , and it is a great joy to me to have the honour of welcoming you here . At the same time , I can_ _not say that I should rejoice if it were your intention to become my stepmother .
I must confess that I should find it difficult to pay you the compliment ; and it is a title , forgive me , that I can_ _not wish you to have .
To some this speech would seem coarse , but I feel that you understand it . This marriage , Madam , is altogether repugnant to me .
What a very impertinent speech to make ;
and what a confession to make to her ! Mar .
And as my answer , I must tell you that things are much=the=same with me , and that , if you have any repugnance in seeing me your stepmother , I shall have no less in seeing you my stepson .
Do not believe , I beg of you , that it is of my own will that this trouble has come upon you .
I should be deeply grieved to cause you the least sorrow , and unless I am forced to it by a power I must obey , I give you my word that , I will never consent to a marriage which is so painful to you .
HAR . She is right .
A foolish speech deserves a foolish answer .
I beg your pardon , my love , for the impertinence of my son . He is a silly young fellow , who has not=yet learnt the value of his own words .
Mar . I assure you that he has not at=all offended me . I am thankful , on=the=contrary , that he has spoken so openly .
It is very kind of you to excuse him thus . Time will make him wiser , and you will see that his feelings will change .
CLE . No , father , they will never change ;
Did ever anybody see such folly ?
He is becoming worse and worse .
CLE . Would you have me false to my inmost feelings ?
HAR . Again !
Change your manners , if you please .
CLE .
Yes , Madam , to possess you is , in my mind , to possess the=best=of=all treasures ; to obtain you is all my ambition .
There is nothing I would not do for so precious a conquest , and the most powerful obstacles . . .
HAR .
Gently , gently , my son , if you please .
CLE . These are complimentary words which I speak to her in your name .
HAR . Bless me !
I have a tongue of my own to explain my feelings , and I really do_ _n't care for such an advocate as you . . .
Here , bring us some chairs .
Fro . No ; I think it is better for us to go at=once to the fair , in order to be back earlier , and have plenty=of time for talking .
HAR . ( _to_ Brindavoine ) . Have the carriage ready at=once .
Scene XII . -- Harpagon , Marianne , Elise , Cleante , Valere , Frosine . HAR . ( _to_ Marianne ) . I hope you will excuse me , my dear , but I forgot to order some refreshments for you , before you went out .
CLE . I have thought of it , father , and have ordered to be brought in here some baskets of China oranges , sweet citrons , and preserves , which I sent for in your name .
HAR . ( _aside , to_ Valere ) . Valere !
Val . ( _aside , to_ Harpagon ) . He has lost his senses !
CLE . You are afraid , father , that it will not be enough ?
I hope , Madam , that you will have the kindness to excuse it . Mar .
It was by=no=means necessary .
CLE . Did you ever see , Madam , a more brilliant diamond than the one my father has upon his finger ?
Mar . It certainly sparkles very much .
CLE . ( _taking the diamond off his father's finger_ ) . You must see it near .
Mar . It is a beautiful one ; it possesses great lustre .
CLE . ( _steps before_ Marianne , _who wants to restore it_ ) . No , Madam , it is in hands too beautiful ; it is a present my father gives you .
HAR . I ?
CLE . Is it not true , father , that you wish her to keep it for your sake ?
HAR . ( _aside , to his son_ ) .
What ? CLE . ( _to_ Marianne ) .
A strange question indeed ! He is making me signs that I am to force you to accept it .
Mar . I would not . . . .
CLE . ( _to_ Marianne ) . I beg of you . . . .
He would not take it back .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) .
I am bursting with rage !
Mar .
It would be . . . CLE . ( _still hindering_ Marianne _from returning it_ ) . No ;
I tell you , you will offend him .
Mar . Pray . . .
CLE .
By=no=means .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) . Plague take . . .
CLE . He is perfectly shocked at your refusal .
HAR . ( _aside , to his son_ ) . Ah !
traitor !
CLE . ( _to_ Marianne ) . You see he is in despair .
HAR . ( _aside , to his son , threatening him_ ) . You villain ! CLE .
Really , father , it is not my fault .
I do all I can to persuade her to accept it ;
but she is obstinate . HAR . ( _in a rage , aside to his son_ ) . Rascal !
CLE . You are the cause , Madam , of my father scolding me .
HAR . ( _aside , with the same looks_ ) .
Scoundrel !
CLE . ( _to_ Marianne ) . You will make him ill ;
for goodness' sake , hesitate no=longer .
Fro . ( _to_ Marianne ) .
Why so much ceremony ?
Keep the ring , since the gentleman wishes you to .
Mar . ( _to_ Harpagon ) . I will keep it now , Sir , in order not to make you angry , and I shall take another opportunity of returning it to you .
Scene XIII . -- Harpagon , Marianne , Elise , Valere , Frosine , Brindavoine . Brind .
Sir , there is a gentleman here who wants to speak to you .
HAR . Tell him that I am engaged , and that I can_ _not see him to-day .
Brind . He says he has some money for you . HAR . ( _to_ Marianne ) .
Pray , excuse me ;
I will come back directly . Scene XIV .
-- Harpagon , Marianne , Elise , Cleante , Frosine , La=merluche . La Mer . ( _comes in running , and throws_ Harpagon _down_ ) .
Sir . . . . HAR .
Oh ! he has killed me .
CLE . What's the matter , father ?
Have you hurt yourself ?
HAR . The wretch must have been bribed by some of my debtors to break my neck .
Val . ( _to_ Harpagon ) .
There is nothing serious . La Mer . ( _to_ Harpagon ) . I beg your pardon , Sir ;
I thought I had better run fast to tell you . . . . HAR .
What ? La Mer . That your two horses have lost their shoes .
HAR . Take them quickly to the smith . CLE .
In the meantime , father , I will do the honours of the house for you , and take this lady into the garden , where lunch will be brought . Scene XV . -- Harpagon , Valere .
HAR . Valere , look after all this ; and take care , I beseech you , to save as much of it as you can , so=that we may send it back to the tradesman again .
Val . I will .
HAR . ( _alone_ ) .
Miscreant !
do you mean to ruin me ? Act IV .
Scene I . -- Cleante , Marianne , Elise , Frosine . CLE . Let us come in here ; we shall be much better . There is no=one about us that we need be afraid of , and we can speak openly .
Eli . Yes , Madam , my brother has told me of the love he has for you .
I know what sorrow and anxiety such trials as these may cause , and I assure you that I have the greatest sympathy for you .
Mar . I feel it a great comfort in my trouble to have the sympathy of a person like you , and I entreat you , Madam , ever to retain for me a friendship so capable of softening the cruelty of my fate .
Fro . You really are both very unfortunate not to have told me of all this before .
What could I do ?
It is my evil destiny which has willed it so .
But you , fair Marianne , what have you resolved to do ?
What resolution have you taken ? Mar . Alas !
Is it in my power to take any resolution ?
And , dependent as I am , can I do anything=else except form wishes ?
CLE . No other support for me in your heart ?
Nothing but mere wishes ?
No pitying energy ?
No kindly relief ?
No active affection ? Mar . What am I to say to you ?
Put yourself in my place , and judge what I can possibly do .
Advise me , dispose of me , I trust myself entirely to you , for I am sure that you will never ask of me anything but what is modest and seemly .
CLE . Alas !
But what would you have me do ?
Even=if I were , for you , to divest myself of the many scruples which our sex imposes on us , I have too much regard for my mother , who has brought me up with great tenderness , for me to give her any cause of sorrow .
Do all you can with her . Strive to win her . I give you leave to say and do all you wish ;
and if anything depends upon her knowing the true state of my feelings , by all means tell her what they are ;
indeed I will do it myself if=necessary . CLE .
Frosine , dear Frosine , will you not help us ? Fro .
Indeed , I should like to do so , as you know .
I am not naturally unkind .
Heaven has not given me a heart of flint , and I feel but too ready to help when I see young people loving each=other in all earnestness and honesty .
What can we do in this case ?
CLE . Try and think a little .
Mar . Advise us . Eli .
Invent something to undo what you have done .
Fro .
It would be well if the refusal could be made to come from him , and you ought=to try by some means or other to make him dislike you , Marianne .
CLE . You are quite right .
Fro . Yes , right enough , no doubt .
That is what ought=to be done ;
but how in the world are we to set about it ?
that she is deeply in=love with him , and that she would marry him at any cost , were she even to give him all her money by the marriage contract .
I have no doubt he would listen to the proposal .
For certainly he loves you very much , my dear , but he loves money still better .
All that is very well made up . Fro .
Leave it to me ;
I just remember one of my friends who will do beautifully . CLE .
Depend on my gratitude , Frosine , if you succeed .
But , dear Marianne , let us begin , I beg of you , by gaining over your mother ;
it would be a great deal accomplished if this marriage were once broken off .
Make use , I beseech you , of all the power that her tenderness for you gives you over her .
Display without hesitation those eloquent graces , those all-powerful charms , with which Heaven has endowed your eyes and lips ; forget not , I beseech you , those sweet persuasions , those tender entreaties , those loving caresses to which , I feel , nothing could be refused .
Mar . I will do all I can , and will forget nothing .
Scene II . -- Harpagon , Marianne , Elise , Frosine .
HAR . ( _aside , and without being seen_ ) . Ah !
ah ! my son is kissing the hand of his intended stepmother , and his intended stepmother does not seem much averse to it !
Can there be any mystery in all this ?
Eli . Here comes my father .
HAR . The carriage is quite ready , and you can start when you like . CLE .
Since you are not going , father , allow me to take care of them . HAR .
No , stop here ;
they can easily take care of themselves , and I want you . Scene III .
-- Harpagon , Cleante .
HAR . Well , now , all consideration of stepmother aside , tell me what do you think of this lady ?
CLE . What I think of her ? HAR .
Yes , what do you think of her appearance , her figure , her beauty and intelligence ?
CLE . So , so .
HAR .
But still ? CLE .
To tell you the truth , I did not find her such=as I expected .
Her manner is that of a thorough coquette , her figure is rather awkward , her beauty very middling , and her intelligence of the meanest order .
You spoke to her just now , nevertheless . . . .
CLE .
I paid her several compliments in your name , but it was to please you .
HAR . So then you do_ _n't care for her ? CLE .
Who ? I ?
Not in the least . HAR .
I am sorry for it , for that puts an end to a scheme which had occurred to me .
Since I have seen her here , I have been thinking of my own age ; and I feel that people would find fault with me for marrying so young a girl .
This consideration had made me determine to abandon the project , and as I had demanded her in marriage , and had given her my promise , I would have given her to you if it were not for the dislike you have for her .
CLE . To me ?
HAR . To you .
CLE . In marriage ? HAR .
In marriage . CLE . It is true she is not at=all to my taste ;
but , to please you , father , I will bring myself to marry her , if you please .
HAR . If I please !
I am more reasonable than you think .
I do_ _n't wish to compel you .
CLE . Excuse me !
I will make an attempt to love her . HAR .
No , no ;
a marriage can_ _not be happy where there is no love . CLE .
That , my father , will , perhaps , come by and by , and it is said that love is often the fruit of marriage .
HAR .
No , it is not right to risk it on the side of the man , and there are some troublesome things I do_ _n't care to run the chance of .
If you had felt any inclination for her , you should have married her instead of me , but as it is , I will return to my first intention and marry her myself .
CLE . Well , father , since things are so , I had better be frank with you , and reveal our secret to you .
The truth is that I have loved her ever=since I saw her one day on the promenade .
Have you ever paid her any visits ?
CLE . Yes , father .
HAR . Many ? CLE . Yes ;
considering how long we have been acquainted .
HAR . You were well-received .
CLE . Very well , but without her knowing who I was ; and that is why Marianne was so surprised when she saw me today .
HAR . Have you told her of your love , and of your intention of marrying her ? CLE .
Certainly , and I also spoke a little to the mother on the subject . HAR .
Did she kindly receive your proposal for her daughter ?
CLE . Yes , very kindly .
HAR . And does the daughter return your love ?
CLE . If I can believe appearances , she is certainly well-disposed towards me .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) . Well ! I am very glad to have found out this secret ;
it is the very thing I wanted to know . ( _To his son_ ) Now , look here , my son , I tell you what .
You will have , if you please , to get rid of your love for Marianne , to cease to pay your attentions to a person I intend for myself , and to marry very soon the wife I have chosen for you .
CLE .
So , father , it is thus you deceive me !
Very well , since things are come to such a pass , I openly declare to you that I shall not give up my love for Marianne .
No !
You dare to trespass on my grounds ?
CLE .
It is you who trespass on mine .
I was the first . HAR .
Am I not your father , and do you not owe me respect ?
CLE .
There are things in which children are not called upon to pay deference to their fathers ;
and love is no respector of persons .
HAR . My stick will make you know me better . CLE .
All your threatenings are nothing to me . HAR . You will give up Marianne ?
CLE . Never !
HAR . Bring me my stick . Quick , I say !
my stick ! Scene IV . -- Harpagon , Cleante , Master Jacques .
JAC .
Hold ! hold !
Gentlemen , what does this mean ?
What are you thinking of ?
CLE . I do_ _n't care a=bit for it .
JAC . ( _to_ Cleante ) .
Ah ! Sir , gently .
HAR . He dares to speak to me with such impudence as that !
JAC . ( _to_ Harpagon ) .
Ah ! Sir , I beg of you .
CLE . I shall keep to it .
JAC . ( _to_ Cleante ) . What !
to your father ?
HAR . Let me do it .
JAC . ( _to_ Harpagon ) . What !
to your son ?
To me it_ _s different .
HAR . I will make you judge between us , Master Jacques , so=that you may see that I have right on my side .
JAC .
Willingly . ( _To_ Cleante ) Go a=little farther back .
HAR . There is a young girl I love and want to marry , and the scoundrel has the impudence to love her also , and wants to marry her in=spite=of me .
JAC . Oh !
he is wrong . HAR .
Is it not an abominable thing to see a son who does not shrink from becoming the rival of his father ? And is it not his bounden duty to refrain from interfering with my love ?
JAC . You are quite right ;
stop here , and let me go and speak to him .
CLE . ( _to_ Master Jacques , _who comes near him_ ) .
Very well ;
if he wants to make you a judge between us , I have no objection . I care little who it is , and I do_ _n't mind referring our quarrel to you .
JAC . You do me great honour .
CLE . I am in=love with a young girl who returns my affection , and who receives kindly the offer of my heart ;
but my father takes it into his head to disturb our love by asking her in marriage . JAC .
He certainly is wrong . CLE . Is it not shameful for a man of his age to think of marrying ?
I ask you if it is right for him to fall in=love ?
and ought he not now to leave that to younger men ?
JAC . You are quite right ;
he is not serious ;
let me speak a word or two to him . ( _To_ Harpagon ) Really , your son is not so extravagant as you think , and is amenable to reason .
He says that he is conscious of the respect he owes you , and that he only got angry in the heat of the moment . He will willingly submit to all you wish if you will only promise to treat him more kindly than you do , and will give him in marriage a person to his taste .
HAR . Ah !
tell him , Master Jacques , that he will obtain everything from me on those terms , and that , except Marianne , I leave him free to choose for his wife whomsoever he pleases .
JAC .
Leave that to me . ( _To_ Cleante ) Really , your father is not so unreasonable as you make him out to me ; and he tells me that it is your violence which irritated him .
He only objects to your way of doing things , and is quite ready to grant you all you want , provided you will use gentle means and will give him the deference , respect , and submission that a son owes to his father .
CLE . Ah !
Master Jacques , you can assure him that if he grants me Marianne , he will always find me the most submissive of men , and that I shall never do anything contrary=to his pleasure .
JAC . ( _to_ Harpagon ) .
It_ _s all=right ; he consents to what you say . HAR .
Nothing could be better . JAC . ( _to_ Cleante ) . It_ _s all settled ;
he is satisfied with your promises . CLE .
Heaven be praised !
JAC . Gentlemen , you have nothing to do but to talk quietly over the matter together ;
you are agreed now , and yet you were on the point of quarrelling through want of understanding each=other .
CLE . My poor Jacques , I shall be obliged to you all my life .
JAC . Do_ _n't mention it , Sir .
HAR . You have given me great pleasure , Master Jacques , and deserve a reward . ( Harpagon _feels in his pocket_ , Jacques _holds out his hand , but_ Harpagon _only pulls out his handkerchief , and says_ , ) Go ;
I will remember it , I promise you .
JAC . I thank you kindly , Sir .
Scene V . -- Harpagon , Cleante .
CLE . I beg your pardon , father , for having been angry .
HAR . It is nothing .
CLE . I assure you that I feel very sorry about it .
HAR . I am very happy to see you reasonable again .
CLE . How very kind of you so soon to forget my fault .
HAR . One easily forgets the faults of children when they return to their duty .
CLE . What !
you are not angry with me for my extravagant behaviour ?
HAR . By your submission and respectful conduct you compel me to forget my anger .
CLE . I assure you , father , I shall for=ever keep in heart the remembrance of all your kindness .
HAR . And I promise you that , in future , you will obtain all you like from me . CLE .
Oh , father !
I ask nothing more ; it is sufficient for me that you give me Marianne .
HAR . What ? CLE .
I say , father , that I am only too thankful already for what you have done , and that when you give me Marianne , you give me everything .
HAR . Who talks of giving you Marianne ?
CLE . You , father .
HAR . I ? CLE . Yes .
HAR . What !
is it not you who promised to give her up ?
CLE . I !
give her up ?
HAR . Yes . CLE .
Certainly not . HAR .
Did you not give up all pretensions to her ?
CLE . On=the=contrary , I am more determined than ever to have her .
HAR . What , scoundrel ! again ? CLE .
Nothing can make me change my mind .
HAR . Let me get at you again , wretch !
CLE . You can do as you please .
HAR . I forbid you ever to come within my sight .
CLE . As you like .
HAR . I abandon you .
CLE . Abandon me .
HAR . I disown you .
CLE . Disown me .
HAR . I disinherit you .
CLE . As you will .
HAR . I give you my curse . CLE .
I want none of your gifts . Scene VI .
-- Cleante , La=fleche . La FL . ( _leaving the garden with a casket_ ) .
Ah !
Sir , you are just in the nick of time .
Quick ! follow me .
CLE . What is the matter ?
La FL . Follow me , I say . We are saved .
CLE . How ?
La FL . Here is all you want .
CLE . What ?
La FL . I have watched for this all-day .
CLE . What is it ?
La FL . Your father's treasure that I have got hold of .
CLE . How did you manage it ?
La FL . I will tell you all about it .
Let us be off .
I can hear him calling out .
Scene VII . -- Harpagon , _from the garden , rushing in without his hat , and crying_ -- Thieves !
thieves !
assassins !
murder !
Justice , just heavens ! I am undone ;
I am murdered ;
they have cut my throat ;
they have stolen my money !
Who can it be ?
What has become of him ?
Where is he ?
Where is he hiding himself ?
What shall I do to find him ?
Where shall I run ?
Where shall I not run ?
Is he not here ?
Who is this ?
Stop ! ( _To himself , taking hold of his own arm_ ) Give me back my money , wretch . . . .
Ah . . . !
it is myself . . . . My mind is wandering , and I know not where I am , who I am , and what I am doing . Alas !
my poor money !
my poor money !
my dearest friend , they have bereaved me of thee ;
and since thou art gone , I have lost my support , my consolation , and my joy .
All is ended for me , and I have nothing more to do in the world !
Without thee it is impossible for me to live .
It is all=over with me ;
I can bear it no longer .
I am dying ; I am dead ; I am buried .
Is there nobody who will call me from the dead , by restoring my dear money to me , or by telling me who has taken it ?
Ah !
what is it you say ?
It is no=one .
Whoever has committed the deed must have watched carefully for his opportunity , and must have chosen the very moment when I was talking with my miscreant of a son .
I must go .
I will demand justice , and have the whole of my house put to the torture -- my maids and my valets , my son , my daughter , and myself too .
What a crowd of people are assembled here !
Everyone seems to be my thief . I see no=one who does not rouse suspicion in me .
Ha !
what are they speaking of there ?
Of him who stole my money ?
What noise is that up yonder ?
Is it my thief who is there ?
For pity's sake , if you know anything of my thief , I beseech you to tell me .
Is he hiding there among you ?
They all look at me and laugh .
We shall see that they all have a share in the robbery .
Quick !
magistrates , police , provosts , judges , racks , gibbets , and executioners .
I will hang everybody , and if I do not find my money , I will hang myself afterwards .
Act V . Scene I . -- Harpagon , A Police Officer . Off . Leave that to me . I know my business .
Thank Heaven ! this is not the first-time I have been employed in finding out thieves ; and I wish I had as many bags of a thousand francs as I have had people hanged .
HAR . Every magistrate must take this affair in-hand ;
and if my money is not found , I shall call justice against justice itself .
Off . We must take all needful steps .
You say there was in that casket . . . ?
HAR .
Ten thousand crowns in cash . Off .
Ten thousand crowns !
HAR . Ten thousand crowns .
Off . A considerable theft .
HAR . There is no punishment great enough for the enormity of the crime ;
and if it remain unpunished , the most sacred things are no longer secure .
Off . In what coins was that sum ?
HAR . In good louis d'or and pistoles of full weight .
Off . Whom do you suspect of this robbery ?
HAR . Everybody .
I wish you to take into custody the whole town and suburbs .
Off . You must not , if you trust me , frighten anybody , but must use gentle means to collect evidence , in order afterwards to proceed with more rigour for the recovery of the sum which has been taken from you .
put him in boiling water , and hang him up=to the ceiling . HAR .
What ! Him who has robbed me ?
JAC . I was speaking of a sucking pig that your steward has just sent me ; and I want to have it dressed for you after my own fancy .
HAR . This is no=longer the question ;
and you have to speak of something=else to this gentleman .
Off . ( _to_ Jacques ) . Do_ _n't get frightened . I am not a man to cause any scandal , and matters will be carried on by gentle means . JAC . ( _to_ Harpagon ) .
Is this gentleman coming to supper with you ? Off .
You must , in this case , my good man , hide nothing from your master .
JAC . Indeed , Sir , I will show you all I know , and will treat you in the best manner I possibly can .
Off . That's not the question .
JAC . If I do not give as good fare as I should like , it is the fault of your steward , who has clipped my wings with the scissors of his economy .
HAR . Rascal !
Some money has been stolen from you ? HAR .
Yes , you rascal ! And I_ _ll have you hanged if you do_ _n't give it me back again .
Off . ( _to_ Harpagon ) . Pray , do_ _n't be hard upon him . I see by his looks that he is an honest fellow , and that he will tell you all you want to know without going to prison .
Yes , my friend , if you confess , no harm shall come to you , and you shall be well rewarded by your master .
Some money has been stolen from him , and it is not possible that you know nothing about it .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . The very thing I wanted in=order=to be revenged of our steward .
What are you muttering about there ?
Sir , since you want me to tell you what I know , I believe it is your steward who has done this .
HAR . Valere ?
JAC . Yes .
HAR . He who seemed so faithful to me !
JAC . Himself .
I believe that it is he who has robbed you .
HAR . And what makes you believe it ? JAC .
What makes me believe it ?
HAR . Yes .
JAC . I believe it . . . because I believe it .
Off . But you must tell us the proofs you have .
HAR . Did you see him hanging about the place where I had put my money ?
JAC . Yes , indeed .
Where was your money ?
HAR . In the garden .
JAC . Exactly ;
I saw him loitering about in the garden ;
and in what was your money ?
HAR . In a casket .
JAC . The very thing .
I saw him with a casket .
HAR . And this casket , what was it like ?
I shall soon see if it is mine . JAC .
What it was like ?
HAR . Yes .
JAC .
It was like . . . like a casket .
Off . Of=course .
But describe it a little , to see if it is the same .
JAC . It was a large casket .
HAR .
The one taken from me is a small one .
JAC .
Yes , small if you look at it in that way ;
but I call it large because=of what it contains . HAR .
And what colour was it ?
JAC . What colour ?
Off . Yes .
JAC .
Of a colour . . . of a certain colour . . . . Can_ _n't you help me to find the word ? HAR .
Ugh !
JAC . Red ;
is_ _n't it ?
HAR . No , grey .
JAC . Ha !
yes , reddish-grey !
That's what I meant . HAR .
There is no doubt about it , it_ _s my casket for certain .
Write down his evidence , Sir ! Heavens !
whom can we trust after that ?
We must never swear to anything , and I believe now that I might rob my own self .
JAC . ( _to_ Harpagon ) .
There he is coming back , Sir ; I beg of you not to go and tell him that it was I who let it all-out , Sir . Scene III .
-- Harpagon , The Police Officer , Valere , Master Jacques . HAR . Come , come near , and confess the most abominable action , the most horrible crime , that was ever committed .
Val . What do you want , Sir ?
HAR . What , wretch !
you do not blush for shame after such a crime ?
Val . Of what crime do you speak ?
HAR . Of what crime I speak ?
Base villain , as=if you did not know what I mean !
It is in vain for you to try to hide it ;
the thing is discovered , and I have just heard all the particulars .
Sir , since everything is known to you , I will neither deny what I have done nor will I try to palliate it .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . Oh !
oh !
Have I guessed the truth ? Val .
I intended to speak to you about it , and I was watching for a favourable opportunity ; but , as this is no=longer possible , I beg of you not to be angry , and to hear my motives .
HAR . And what fine motives can you possibly give me , infamous thief ?
Val . Ah !
Sir , I do not deserve these names .
I am guilty towards you , it is true ;
but , after all , my fault is pardonable .
HAR . How pardonable ?
A premeditated trick , and such an assassination as this ! Val .
I beseech you not to be so angry with me .
When you have heard all I have to say , you will see that the harm is not so great as you make it out to be .
HAR . The harm not so great as I make it out to be !
What !
my heart's blood , scoundrel ! Val .
Your blood , Sir , has not fallen into bad hands .
It is , indeed , my intention that you should restore what you have taken from me .
Val . Your honour , Sir , shall be fully satisfied .
HAR .
Honour is not the question in all this .
But tell me what made you commit such a deed ?
Val . Alas !
do you ask it ? HAR .
Yes , I should rather think that I do . Val .
A god , Sir , who carries with him his excuses for all he makes people do : Love .
HAR . Love ? Val .
Yes . HAR . Fine love that !
fine love , indeed ! the love of my gold ! Val .
No , Sir , it is not your wealth that has tempted me , it is not that which has dazzled me ;
In the name of all the devils , no , I shall not leave it to you .
But did anyone ever meet with such villainy !
He wishes to keep what he has robbed me of !
Val . Do you call that a robbery ?
HAR . If I call that a robbery ?
A treasure like that ! Val .
I readily acknowledge that it is a treasure , and the most precious one you have .
But it will not be losing it to leave it to me .
I will do nothing of the kind .
What in the world are you driving at ?
Val . We have pledged our faith to each=other , and have taken an oath never to forsake one=another .
HAR . The oath is admirable , and the promise strange enough !
Val . Yes , we are engaged to each=other for=ever . HAR .
I know pretty well how to disengage you , I assure you of that . Val .
Nothing but death can separate us .
HAR . You must be devilishly bewitched by my money .
Val . I have told you already , Sir , that it is not self-interest which has prompted me to what I have done .
It was not that which prompted my heart ;
a nobler motive inspired me . HAR .
We shall hear presently that it is out=of Christian charity that he covets my money !
You will do as you please , and I am ready to suffer all the violence you care to inflict upon me , but I beg of you to believe , at least , that if there is any harm done , I am the only one guilty , and that your daughter has done nothing wrong in all this .
HAR . I should think not !
It would be strange , indeed , if my daughter had a share in this crime .
But I will have that treasure back again , and you must confess to what place you have carried it off . [ 6 ]
Val .
I have not carried it off , and it is still in your house .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) .
O my beloved casket ! ( _To_ Valere ) My treasure has not left my house ?
Val . No , Sir .
HAR .
Well , then , tell me , have you taken any liberties with . . . ?
Val . Ah !
Sir , you wrong us both ;
the flame with which I burn is too pure , too full of respect .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) .
He burns for my casket ! Val .
I had rather die than show the least offensive thought : I found too much modesty and too much purity for that .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) . My cash-box modest ! Val .
All my desires were limited to the pleasures of sight , and nothing criminal has profaned the passion those fair eyes have inspired me with .
HAR . ( _aside_ ) .
The fair eyes of my cash-box !
He speaks of it as a lover does of his mistress . Val .
Dame=Claude knows the whole truth , and she can bear witness to it . HAR .
Hallo !
my servant is an accomplice in this affair ?
Val . Yes , Sir , she was a witness to our engagement ;
and it was after being sure of the innocence of my love that she helped me to persuade your daughter to engage herself to me .
HAR .
Ah ! ( _Aside_ ) Has the fear of justice made him lose his senses ? ( _To_ Valere ) What rubbish are you talking about my daughter ?
Val . I say , Sir , that I found it most difficult to make her modesty consent to what my love asked of her .
HAR . The modesty of whom ?
Val . Of your daughter ;
and it was only yesterday that she could make up her mind to sign our mutual promise of marriage .
HAR . My daughter has signed a promise of marriage ? Val .
Yes , Sir , and I have also signed .
HAR . O heavens !
another misfortune !
JAC . ( _to the_ Officer ) .
Write , Sir , write .
HAR . Aggravation of misery !
Excess of despair ! ( _To the_ Officer ) Sir , discharge your duty , and draw me up an indictment against him as a thief and a suborner .
JAC . As a thief and a suborner .
Val .
These are names which I do not deserve , and when you know who I am . . . .
Scene IV .
-- Harpagon , Elise , Marianne , Valere , Frosine , Master Jacques , The Police Officer . HAR . Ah !
guilty daughter !
unworthy of a father like me !
is it thus that you put into practice the lessons I have given you ?
You give your love to an infamous thief , and engage yourself to him without my consent !
But you shall both be disappointed . ( _To_ Elise ) Four strong walls will answer for your conduct in the future ; ( _to_ Valere ) and good gallows , impudent thief , shall do me justice for your audacity . Val .
Your anger will be no judge in this affair , and I shall at=least have a hearing before I am condemned .
HAR .
I was wrong to say gallows ;
you shall be broken alive on the wheel .
Eli . ( _kneeling to her father_ ) . Ah !
my father , be more merciful , I beseech you , and do not let your paternal authority drive matters to extremes .
Do not suffer yourself to be carried away by the first outburst of your anger , but give yourself time to consider what you do .
Take the trouble of inquiring about him whose conduct has offended you .
He is not what you imagine , and you will think it less strange that I should have given myself to him , when you know that without him you would long=ago have lost me for=ever .
Yes , father , it is he who saved me from the great danger I ran in the waters , and to whom you owe the life of that very daughter who . . .
HAR .
All this is nothing ;
My father , I beseech you , in the name of paternal love , grant me . . .
HAR .
No , no. I will hear nothing , and justice must have its course .
JAC . ( _aside_ ) . You shall pay me for the blows you gave me .
Fro . What a perplexing state of affairs !
Scene V . -- Anselme , Harpagon , Elise , Marianne , Frosine , Valere , The Police Officer , Master Jacques . ANS . What can have happened , Mr.=Harpagon ?
You are quite upset . HAR .
Ah , Mr.=Anselme , you see in me the most unfortunate of men ;
and you can never imagine what vexation and disorder is connected with the contract you have come to sign !
I am attacked in my property ;
I am attacked in my honour ;
and you see there a scoundrel and a wretch who has violated the most sacred rights , who has introduced himself into my house as a servant in=order=to steal my money , and seduce my daughter .
Yes ; they have given each=other a promise of marriage .
This insult concerns you , Mr.=Anselme ;
and it is you who ought=to be plaintiff against him , and who at your own expense ought=to prosecute him to the utmost , in=order=to be revenged .
ANS .
It is not my intention to force anybody to marry me , and to lay claim to a heart which has already bestowed itself ;
This is the gentleman , an honest commissary , who has promised that he will omit nothing of what concerns the duties of his office . ( _To the_ Officer , _showing_ Valere ) Charge him , Sir , as he ought=to be , and make matters very criminal .
I do_ _n't care a pin for all those stories , and the world is full , nowadays , of those pretenders to nobility , of those impostors , who take advantage of their obscurity and deck themselves out insolently with the first illustrious name that comes into their head .
Val . Know that I am too upright to adorn myself with a name which is not mine , and that all Naples can bear testimony to my birth !
ANS . Softly !
Take care of what you are about to say .
You speak before a man to whom all Naples is known , and who can soon see if your story is true . Val . ( _proudly putting on his hat_ ) .
Certainly ; I know who he is , and few people know him better than I do . HAR .
ANS . Have patience and let him speak ; we shall soon know what he has to say of him .
Val . That it is to him that I owe my birth .
ANS . To him ?
Val . Yes . ANS . Nonsense ;
you are laughing .
Consider your words better before you speak ;
it is no imposture , and I say nothing here that I can_ _not prove .
ANS . What !
You dare to call yourself the son of Don Thomas=d'=Alburci ? Val .
Yes , I dare to do so ; and I am ready to maintain the truth against anyone , who ever he may be .
ANS . This audacity is marvellous .
Yes ; but learn to your confusion that his son , seven years of age , was , with a servant , saved from the wreck by a Spanish vessel , and that this son is he who now speaks to you .
Learn that the captain of that ship , touched with compassion at my misfortune , loved me ; that he had me brought up as his own son , and that the profession of arms has been my occupation ever=since I was fit for it ;
that lately I heard that my father is not dead , as I thought he was ; that , passing this way to go and find him out , an accident , arranged by heaven , brought to my sight the charming Elise ; that the sight of her made me a slave to her beauty , and that the violence of my love and the harshness of her father made me take the resolution to come into his house disguised as a servant , and to send some one else to look after my parents .
ANS . But what other proofs have you besides your own words that all this is not a fable based by you upon truth . Val . What proofs ?
The captain of the Spanish vessel ;
a ruby seal which belonged to my father ;
an agate bracelet which my mother put upon my arm ; and old Pedro , that servant who was saved with me from the wreck .
Mar . Alas !
I can answer here for what you have said ; that you do not deceive us ; and all you say clearly tells me that you are my brother .
Val . You my sister !
Mar . Yes , my heart was touched as=soon=as you began to speak ;
and our mother , who will be delighted at seeing you , often told me of the misfortunes of our family .
Heaven spared us also in that dreadful wreck ;
but our life was spared at the cost of our liberty , for my mother and myself were taken up by pirates from the wreck of our vessel .
After ten years of slavery a lucky event gave us back to liberty , and we returned to Naples , where we found all our property sold , and could hear no news of our father .
We embarked for Genoa , where my mother went to gather what remained of a family estate which had been much disputed .
Leaving her unjust relatives , she came here , where she has lived but a weary life .
ANS .
O heaven !
how wonderful are thy doings , and how true it is that it only belongs to thee to work miracles !
Come to my arms , my children , and share the joy of your happy father !
Val . You are our father ?
Mar . It was for you that my mother wept ? ANS .
Yes , my daughter ; yes , my son ;
I am Don Thomas=d'=Alburci , whom heaven saved from the waves , with all the money he had with him , and who , after sixteen years , believing you all dead , was preparing , after long journeys , to seek the consolations of a new family in marrying a gentle and virtuous woman .
The little security there was for my life in Naples has made me abandon the idea of returning there , and having found the means of selling what I had , I settled here under the name of Anselme .
I wished to forget the sorrows of a name associated with so many and great troubles .
HAR . ( _to_ Anselme ) .
He is your son ?
He steal anything from you !
HAR . Yes .
Val . Who said so ?
HAR . Master Jacques .
Val . ( _to_ Master Jacques ) . You say that ? JAC . You see that I am not saying anything . HAR .
He certainly did . There is the officer who has received his deposition .
Val . Can you really believe me capable of such a base action ?
HAR . Capable or not capable , I must find my money . Scene VI .
-- Harpagon , Anselme , Elise , Marianne , Cleante , Valere , Frosine , The Police Officer , Master Jacques , La=fleche . CLE . Do not grieve for your money , father , and accuse any one .
I have news of it , and I come here to tell you that if you consent to let me marry Marianne , your money will be given back to you .
HAR . Where is it ? CLE .
Do not trouble yourself about that .
It is in a safe place , and I answer for it ; everything depends on your resolve .
Has nothing been taken out ?
CLE . Nothing at=all .
Is it your intention to agree to this marriage , and to join your consent to that of her mother , who leaves her at liberty to do as she likes ?
Mar . ( _to_ Cleante ) . But you do not know that this consent is no longer sufficient , and that heaven has given me back a brother ( _showing_ Valere ) , at the same time that it has given me back a father ( _showing_ Anselme ) ; and you have now to obtain me from him .
ANS . Heaven , my dear children , has not restored you to me that I might oppose your wishes .
Mr.=Harpagon , you must be aware that the choice of a young girl is more likely to fall upon the son than upon the father .
Come , now , do not force people to say to you what is unnecessary , and consent , as I do , to this double marriage .
HAR . In order for me to be well-advised , I must see my casket .
CLE . You shall see it safe and sound .
HAR . I have no money to give my children in marriage .
ANS . Never mind , I have some ;
do not let this trouble you .
HAR . Do you take upon yourself to defray the expenses of these two weddings ? ANS .
Yes , I will take this responsibility upon myself .
Are you satisfied ?
HAR . Yes , provided you order me a new suit of clothes for the wedding .
ANS . Agreed !
Let us go and enjoy the blessings this happy day brings us . Off .
Stop , Sirs , stop ; softly , if you please . Who is to pay me for my writing ?
HAR . We have nothing to do with your writing . Off .
Indeed ! and yet I do not pretend to have done it for nothing .
HAR . ( _showing_ Master Jacques ) . There is a fellow you can hang in payment !
JAC . Alas !
what is one to do ?
I receive a good cudgelling for telling the truth , and now they would hang me for lying .
ANS . Mr.=Harpagon , you must forgive him this piece of imposture .
HAR . You will pay the officer then ?
ANS . Let it be so .
Let us go quickly , my children , to share our joy with your mother !
HAR . And I to see my dear casket .
