The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Luck of Roaring Camp and Other Tales
by Bret Harte
(#51 in our series by Bret Harte)

THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP


There was commotion in Roaring Camp. It could not have been a fight,
for in 1850 that was not novel enough to have called together the
entire settlement. The ditches and claims were not only deserted, but
"Tuttle's grocery" had contributed its gamblers, who, it will be
remembered, calmly continued their game the day that French Pete and
Kanaka Joe shot each other to death over the bar in the front room.
The whole camp was collected before a rude cabin on the outer edge of
the clearing. Conversation was carried on in a low tone, but the name
of a woman was frequently repeated. It was  a name familiar enough in
the camp,--"Cherokee Sal."

Perhaps the less said of her the better. She was a coarse and, it is
to be feared, a very sinful woman. But at that time she was the only
woman in Roaring Camp, and was just then lying in sore extremity, when
she most needed the ministration of her own sex. Dissolute, abandoned,
and irreclaimable, she was yet suffering a martyrdom hard enough to
bear even when veiled by sympathizing womanhood, but now terrible in
her loneliness. The primal curse had come to her in that original
isolation which must have made the punishment of the first
transgression so dreadful. It was, perhaps, part of the expiation of
her sin  that, at a moment when she most lacked her sex's intuitive
tenderness and care, she met only the half-contemptuous faces of her
masculine associates. Yet a few of the spectators were, I think,
touched by her sufferings. Sandy Tipton thought it was "rough on Sal,"
and, in the contemplation of her condition, for a moment rose superior
to the fact that he had an ace and two bowers in his sleeve.

It will be seen also that the situation was novel. Deaths were by no
means uncommon in Roaring Camp, but a birth was a new thing. People
had been dismissed the camp effectively, finally, and with no
possibility of return; but this was the first time that anybody had
been introduced _ab initio_. Hence the excitement.

"You go in there, Stumpy," said a prominent citizen known as
"Kentuck," addressing one of the loungers. "Go in there, and see what
you kin do. You've had experience in them things."

Perhaps there was a fitness in the selection. Stumpy, in other climes,
had been the putative head of two families; in fact, it was owing to
some legal informality in these proceedings that Roaring Camp--a city
of refuge--was indebted to his company. The crowd approved the choice,
and Stumpy was wise enough to bow to the majority. The door closed on
the extempore surgeon and midwife, and Roaring Camp sat down outside,
smoked its pipe, and awaited the issue.

The assemblage numbered about a hundred men. One or two of these were
actual fugitives from justice, some were criminal, and all were
reckless. Physically they exhibited no indication of their past lives
and character. The greatest scamp had a Raphael face, with a profusion
of blonde hair; Oakhurst, a gambler, had the melancholy air and
intellectual abstraction of a Hamlet; the coolest and most courageous
man was scarcely over five feet in height, with a soft voice and an
embarrassed, timid manner. The  term "roughs" applied to them was a
distinction rather than a definition. Perhaps in the minor details of
fingers, toes, ears, etc., the camp may have been deficient, but these
slight omissions did not detract from their aggregate force. The
strongest man had but three fingers on his right hand; the best shot
had but one eye.

Such was the physical aspect of the men that were dispersed around the
cabin. The camp lay in a triangular valley between two hills and a
river. The only outlet was a steep trail over the summit of a hill
that faced the cabin, now illuminated by the rising moon. The
suffering woman might have seen it from the rude bunk whereon she
lay,--seen it winding like a silver thread until it was lost in the
stars above.

A fire of withered pine boughs added sociability to the gathering. By
degrees the natural levity of Roaring Camp returned. Bets were freely
offered and taken regarding the result. Three to five that "Sal would
get through with it;" even that the child would survive; side bets as
to the sex and complexion of the coming stranger. In the midst of an
excited discussion an exclamation came from those nearest the door,
and the camp stopped to listen. Above the swaying and moaning of the
pines, the swift rush of the river, and the crackling of the fire rose
a sharp, querulous cry,--a cry unlike anything heard before in the
camp. The pines stopped moaning, the river ceased to rush, and the
fire to crackle. It seemed as if Nature had stopped to listen too.

The camp rose to its feet as one man! It was proposed to explode a
barrel of gunpowder; but in consideration of the situation of the
mother, better counsels prevailed, and only a few revolvers were
discharged; for whether owing to the rude surgery of the camp, or some
other reason, Cherokee Sal was sinking fast. Within an hour she had
climbed, as it were, that rugged road that led to the stars, and so
passed out of Roaring Camp, its sin and shame, forever. I do not think
that the announcement disturbed them much, except in speculation as to
the fate of the child. "Can he live now?" was asked of Stumpy. The
answer was doubtful. The only other being of Cherokee Sal's sex and
maternal condition in the settlement was an ass. There was some
conjecture as  to fitness, but the experiment was tried. It was less
problematical than the ancient treatment of Romulus and Remus, and
apparently as successful.

When these details were completed, which exhausted another hour, the
door was opened, and the anxious crowd of men, who had already formed
themselves into a queue, entered in single file. Beside the low bunk
or shelf, on which the figure of the mother was starkly outlined below
the blankets, stood a pine table. On this a candle-box was placed, and
within it, swathed in staring red flannel, lay the last arrival at
Roaring Camp. Beside the candle-box was placed a hat. Its use was soon
indicated. "Gentlemen," said Stumpy, with a singular mixture of
authority and _ex officio_ complacency,--"gentlemen will please
pass in at the front door, round the table, and out at the back door.
Them as wishes to contribute anything toward the orphan will find a
hat handy." The first man entered with his hat on; he uncovered,
however, as he looked about him, and so unconsciously set an example
to the next. In such communities good and bad actions are catching. As
the procession filed in comments were audible,--criticisms addressed
perhaps rather to Stumpy in the character of showman: "Is that him?"
"Mighty small specimen;" "Hasn't more'n  got the color;" "Ain't bigger
nor a derringer." The contributions were as characteristic: A silver
tobacco box; a doubloon; a navy revolver, silver mounted; a gold
specimen; a very beautifully embroidered lady's handkerchief (from
Oakhurst the gambler); a diamond breastpin; a diamond  ring (suggested
by the pin, with the remark from the giver that he "saw that pin and
went two diamonds better"); a slung-shot; a Bible (contributor not
detected); a golden spur; a silver teaspoon (the initials, I regret to
say, were not the giver's); a pair of surgeon's shears; a lancet; a
Bank of England note for L5; and about $200 in loose gold and silver
coin. During these proceedings Stumpy maintained a silence as
impassive as the dead on his left, a gravity as inscrutable as that of
the newly born on his right. Only one incident occurred to break the
monotony of the curious procession. As Kentuck bent over the candle-
box half curiously, the child turned, and, in a spasm of pain, caught
at his groping finger, and held it fast for a moment. Kentuck looked
foolish and embarrassed. Something like a blush tried to assert itself
in his weather-beaten cheek. "The d--d little cuss!" he said, as he
extricated his finger, with perhaps more tenderness and care than he
might have been deemed capable of showing. He held that finger a
little apart from its fellows as he went out, and examined it
curiously. The examination provoked the same original remark in regard
to the child. In fact, he seemed to enjoy repeating it. "He rastled
with my finger," he remarked to Tipton, holding up the member, "the
d--d little cuss!"

It was four o'clock before the camp sought repose. A light burnt in
the cabin where the watchers sat, for Stumpy did not go to bed that
night. Nor did Kentuck. He drank quite freely, and related with great
gusto his experience, invariably ending with his characteristic
condemnation of the newcomer. It seemed to relieve him of any unjust
implication of sentiment, and Kentuck had the weaknesses of the nobler
sex. When everybody else had gone to bed, he walked down to the river
and whistled reflectingly. Then he walked up the gulch past the cabin,
still whistling with demonstrative unconcern. At a large redwood-tree
he  paused and retraced his steps, and again passed the cabin. Halfway
down to the river's bank he again paused, and then returned and
knocked at the door. It was opened by Stumpy. "How goes it?" said
Kentuck, looking past Stumpy toward the candle-box. "All serene!"
replied Stumpy. "Anything up?" "Nothing." There was a pause--an
embarrassing one--Stumpy still holding the door. Then Kentuck had
recourse to his finger, which he held up to Stumpy. "Rastled with
it,--the d--d little cuss," he said, and retired.

The next day Cherokee Sal had such rude sepulture as Roaring Camp
afforded. After her body had been committed to the hillside, there was
a formal meeting of the camp to discuss what should be done with her
infant. A resolution to adopt it was unanimous and enthusiastic. But
an animated discussion in regard to the manner and feasibility of
providing for its wants at once sprang up. It was remarkable that the
argument partook of none of those fierce personalities with which
discussions were usually conducted at Roaring Camp. Tipton proposed
that they should send the child to Red Dog,--a distance of forty
miles,--where female attention could be procured. But the unlucky
suggestion met with fierce and unanimous opposition. It was evident
that no plan which entailed parting from their new acquisition would
for a moment be entertained. "Besides," said Tom Ryder, "them fellows
at Red Dog would swap it, and ring in somebody else on us." A
disbelief in the honesty of other camps prevailed at Roaring Camp, as
in other places.

The introduction of a female nurse in the camp also met with
objection. It was argued that no decent woman could be prevailed to
accept Roaring Camp as her home, and the speaker urged that "they
didn't want any more of the other kind." This unkind allusion to the
defunct mother, harsh as it may seem, was the first spasm of
propriety,--the first symptom of the camp's regeneration. Stumpy
advanced nothing. Perhaps he felt a certain delicacy in interfering
with the selection of a possible successor in office. But when
questioned, he averred stoutly that he and "Jinny"--the mammal before
alluded to--could manage to rear the child. There was something
original, independent, and heroic about the plan that pleased the
camp. Stumpy was retained. Certain articles were sent for to
Sacramento. "Mind," said the treasurer, as he pressed a bag of gold-
dust into the expressman's hand, "the best that can be got,--lace, you
know, and filigree-work and frills,--d--n the cost!" Strange to say,
the child thrived. Perhaps the invigorating climate of the mountain
camp was compensation for material deficiencies. Nature took the
foundling to her broader breast. In that rare atmosphere of the Sierra
foothills,--that air pungent with balsamic odor, that ethereal cordial
at once bracing and exhilarating,--he may have found food and
nourishment, or a subtle chemistry that transmuted ass's milk to lime
and phosphorus. Stumpy inclined to the belief that it was the latter
and good nursing. "Me and that ass," he would say, "has been father
and mother to him! Don't you," he would add, apostrophizing the
helpless bundle before him, "never go back on us."

By the time he was a month old the necessity of giving him a name
became apparent. He had generally been known as "The Kid," "Stumpy's
Boy," "The Coyote" (an allusion to his vocal powers), and even by
Kentuck's endearing diminutive of "The d--d little cuss." But these
were felt to be vague and unsatisfactory, and were at last dismissed
under another influence. Gamblers and adventurers are generally
superstitious, and Oakhurst one day declared that the baby had brought
"the luck" to Roaring Camp. It was certain that of late they had been
successful. "Luck" was the name  agreed upon, with the prefix of Tommy
for greater convenience. No allusion was made to the mother, and the
father was unknown. "It's better," said the philosophical Oakhurst,
"to take a fresh deal all round. Call him Luck, and start him fair." A
day was accordingly set apart for the christening. What was meant by
this ceremony the reader may imagine who has already gathered some
idea of the reckless irreverence of Roaring Camp. The master of
ceremonies was one "Boston," a noted wag, and the occasion seemed to
promise the greatest facetiousness. This ingenious satirist had spent
two days in preparing a burlesque of the Church service, with pointed
local allusions. The choir was properly trained, and Sandy Tipton was
to stand godfather. But after the procession had marched to the grove
with music and banners, and the child had been deposited before a mock
altar, Stumpy stepped before the expectant crowd. "It ain't my style
to spoil fun, boys," said the little man, stoutly eying the faces
around him, "but it strikes me that this thing ain't exactly on the
squar. It's playing it pretty low down on this yer baby to ring in fun
on him that he ain't goin' to understand. And ef there's goin' to be
any godfathers round, I'd like to see who's got any better rights than
me." A silence followed Stumpy's speech. To the credit of all
humorists be it said that the first man to acknowledge its justice was
the satirist thus stopped of his fun. "But," said Stumpy, quickly
following up his advantage, "we're here for a christening, and we'll
have it. I proclaim you Thomas Luck, according to the laws of the
United States and the State of California, so help me God." It was the
first time that the name of the Deity had been otherwise uttered than
profanely in the camp. The form of christening was perhaps even more
ludicrous than the satirist had conceived; but strangely enough,
nobody saw it and nobody laughed. "Tommy" was christened as seriously
as he would have  been under a Christian roof, and cried and was
comforted in as orthodox fashion.

And so the work of regeneration began in Roaring Camp. Almost
imperceptibly a change came over the settlement. The cabin assigned to
"Tommy Luck"--or "The Luck," as he was more frequently called--first
showed signs of improvement. It was kept scrupulously clean and
whitewashed. Then it was boarded, clothed, and papered. The rosewood,
cradle, packed eighty miles by mule, had, in Stumpy's way of putting
it, "sorter killed the rest of the furniture." So the rehabilitation
of the cabin became a necessity. The men who were in the habit of
lounging in at Stumpy's to see "how 'The Luck' got on" seemed to
appreciate the change, and in self-defense the rival establishment of
"Tuttle's grocery" bestirred itself and imported a carpet and mirrors.
The reflections of the latter on the appearance of Roaring Camp tended
to produce stricter habits of personal cleanliness. Again Stumpy
imposed a kind of quarantine upon those who aspired to the honor and
privilege of holding The Luck. It was a cruel mortification to
Kentuck--who, in the carelessness of a large nature and the habits of
frontier life, had begun to regard all garments as a second cuticle,
which, like a snake's, only sloughed off through decay--to be debarred
this privilege from certain prudential reasons. Yet such was the
subtle influence of innovation that he thereafter appeared regularly
every afternoon in a clean shirt and face still shining from his
ablutions. Nor were moral and social sanitary laws neglected. "Tommy,"
who was supposed to spend his whole existence in a persistent attempt
to repose, must not be disturbed by noise. The shouting and yelling,
which had gained the camp its infelicitous title, were not permitted
within hearing distance of Stumpy's. The men conversed in whispers or
smoked with Indian gravity. Profanity was tacitly given up in these
sacred precincts, and throughout the camp a popular form of expletive,
known as "D--n the luck!" and "Curse the luck!" was abandoned, as
having a new personal bearing. Vocal music was not interdicted, being
supposed to have a soothing, tranquilizing quality; and one song, sung
by "Man-o'-War Jack," an English sailor from her Majesty's Australian
colonies, was quite popular as a lullaby. It was a lugubrious recital
of the exploits of "the Arethusa, Seventy-four," in a muffled minor,
ending with a prolonged dying fall at the burden of each verse," On b-
oo-o-ard of the Arethusa." It was a fine sight to see Jack holding The
Luck, rocking from side to side as if with the motion of a ship, and
crooning forth this naval ditty. Either through the peculiar rocking
of Jack or the length of his song,--it contained ninety stanzas, and
was continued with conscientious deliberation to the bitter end,--the
lullaby generally had the desired effect. At such times the men would
lie at full length under the trees in the soft summer twilight,
smoking their pipes and drinking in the melodious utterances. An
indistinct idea that this was pastoral happiness pervaded the camp.
"This 'ere kind o' think," said the Cockney Simmons, meditatively
reclining on his elbow, "is 'evingly." It reminded him of Greenwich.

On the long summer days The Luck was usually carried to the gulch from
whence the golden store of Roaring Camp was taken. There, on a blanket
spread over pine boughs, he would lie while the men were working in
the ditches below. Latterly there was a rude attempt to decorate this
bower with flowers and sweet-smelling shrubs, and generally some one
would bring him a cluster of wild honeysuckles,  azaleas, or the
painted blossoms of Las Mariposas. The men had suddenly awakened to
the fact that there were beauty and significance in these trifles,
which they had so long trodden carelessly beneath their feet. A flake
of glittering mica, a fragment of variegated quartz, a bright  pebble
from the bed of the creek, became beautiful to eyes thus cleared and
strengthened, and were invariably put aside for The Luck. It was
wonderful how many treasures the woods and hillsides yielded that
"would do for Tommy." Surrounded by playthings such as never child out
of fairyland had before, it is to be hoped that Tommy was content. He
appeared to be serenely happy, albeit there was an infantine gravity
about him, a contemplative light in his round gray eyes, that sometimes
worried Stumpy. He was always tractable and quiet, and it is recorded
that once, having crept beyond his "corral,"--a hedge of tessellated
pine boughs, which surrounded his bed,--he dropped over the bank on his
head in the soft earth, and remained with his mottled legs in the air
in that position for at least five minutes with unflinching gravity.
He was extricated without a murmur. I hesitate to record the many
other instances of his sagacity, which rest, unfortunately, upon the
statements of prejudiced friends. Some of them were not without a
tinge of superstition. "I crep' up the bank just now," said Kentuck
one day, in a breathless state of excitement, "and dern my skin if he
wasn't a-talking to a jaybird as was a-sittin' on his lap. There they
was, just as free and sociable as anything you please, a-jawin' at
each other just like two cherrybums." Howbeit, whether creeping over
the pine boughs or lying lazily on his back blinking at the leaves
above him, to him the birds sang, the squirrels chattered, and the
flowers bloomed. Nature was his nurse and playfellow. For him she
would let slip between the leaves golden shafts of sunlight that fell
just within his grasp; she would send wandering breezes to visit him
with the balm of bay and resinous gum; to him the tall redwoods nodded
familiarly and sleepily, the bumblebees buzzed, and the rooks cawed a
slumberous accompaniment.

Such was the golden summer of Roaring Camp. They  were "flush times,"
and the luck was with them. The claims had yielded enormously. The
camp was jealous of its privileges and looked suspiciously on
strangers. No encouragement was given to immigration, and, to make
their seclusion more perfect, the land on either side of the mountain
wall that surrounded the camp they duly preempted. This, and a
reputation for singular proficiency with the revolver, kept the
reserve of Roaring Camp inviolate. The expressman--their only
connecting link with the surrounding world--sometimes told wonderful
stories of the camp. He would say, "They've a street up there in
'Roaring' that would lay over any street in Red Dog. They've got vines
and flowers round their houses, and they wash themselves twice a day.
But they're mighty rough on strangers, and they worship an Ingin
baby."

With the prosperity of the camp came a desire for further improvement.
It was  proposed to build a hotel in the following spring, and to
invite one or two decent families to reside there for the sake of The
Luck, who might perhaps profit by female companionship. The sacrifice
that this concession to the sex cost these men, who were fiercely
skeptical in regard to its general virtue and usefulness, can only be
accounted for by their affection for Tommy. A few still held out. But
the resolve could not be carried into effect for three months, and the
minority meekly yielded in the hope that something might turn up to
prevent it. And it did.

The winter of 1851 will long be remembered in the foothills. The snow
lay deep on the Sierras, and every mountain creek became a river, and
every river a lake. Each gorge and gulch was transformed into a
tumultuous watercourse that descended the hillsides, tearing down
giant trees and scattering its drift and debris along the plain. Red
Dog had been twice under water, and Roaring Camp had been forewarned.
"Water put the gold into them gulches,"  said Stumpy. "It's been here
once and will be here again!" And that night the North Fork suddenly
leaped over its banks and swept up the triangular valley of Roaring
Camp.

In the confusion of rushing water, crashing trees, and crackling
timber, and the darkness which seemed to flow with the water and blot
out the fair valley, but little could be done to collect the scattered
camp. When the morning broke, the cabin of Stumpy, nearest the river-
bank, was gone. Higher up the gulch they found the body of its unlucky
owner; but the pride, the hope, the joy, The Luck, of Roaring Camp had
disappeared. They were returning with sad hearts when a shout from the
bank recalled them.

It was a relief-boat from down the river. They had picked up, they
said, a man and an infant, nearly exhausted, about two miles below.
Did anybody know them, and did they belong here?

It needed but a glance to show them Kentuck lying there, cruelly
crushed and bruised, but still holding The Luck of Roaring Camp in his
arms. As they bent over the strangely assorted pair, they saw that the
child was cold and pulseless. "He is dead," said one. Kentuck opened
his eyes. "Dead?" he repeated feebly. "Yes, my man, and you are dying
too." A smile lit the eyes of the expiring Kentuck. "Dying!" he
repeated; "he's a-taking me with him. Tell the boys I've got The Luck
with me now;" and the strong man, clinging to the frail babe as a
drowning man is said to cling to a straw, drifted away into the
shadowy river that flows forever to the unknown sea.




THE OUTCASTS OF POKER FLAT


As Mr. John Oakhurst, gambler, stepped into the main street of Poker
Flat on the morning of the 23d of November, 1850, he was conscious of
a change in its moral atmosphere since the preceding night. Two or
three men, conversing earnestly together, ceased as he approached, and
exchanged significant glances. There was a Sabbath lull in the air,
which, in a settlement unused to Sabbath influences, looked ominous.

Mr. Oakhurst's calm, handsome face betrayed small concern in these
indications. Whether he was conscious of any predisposing cause was
another question. "I reckon they're after somebody," he reflected;
"likely it's me." He returned to his pocket the handkerchief with
which he had been whipping away the red dust of Poker Flat from his
neat boots, and quietly discharged his mind of any further conjecture.

In point of fact, Poker Flat was "after somebody." It had lately
suffered the loss of several thousand dollars, two valuable horses,
and a prominent citizen. It was experiencing a spasm of virtuous
reaction, quite as lawless and ungovernable as any of the acts that
had provoked it. A secret committee had determined to rid the town of
all improper persons. This was done permanently in regard of two men
who were then hanging from the boughs of a sycamore in the gulch, and
temporarily in the banishment of certain other objectionable
characters. I regret to say that some of these were ladies. It is but
due to the sex, however, to state that their impropriety was
professional, and it was only in such easily established standards of
evil that Poker Flat ventured to sit in judgment.

Mr. Oakhurst was right in supposing that he was included in this
category. A few of the committee had urged hanging him as a possible
example and a sure method of reimbursing themselves from his pockets
of the sums he had won from them. "It's agin justice," said Jim
Wheeler, "to let this yer young man from Roaring Camp--an entire
stranger--carry away our money." But a crude sentiment of equity
residing in the breasts of those who had been fortunate enough to win
from Mr. Oakhurst overruled this narrower local prejudice.

Mr. Oakhurst received his sentence with philosophic calmness, none the
less coolly that he was aware of the hesitation of his judges. He was
too much of a gambler not to accept fate. With him life was at best an
uncertain game, and he recognized the usual percentage in favor of the
dealer.

A body of armed men accompanied the deported wickedness of Poker Flat
to the outskirts of the settlement. Besides Mr. Oakhurst, who was
known to be a coolly desperate man, and for whose intimidation the
armed escort was intended, the expatriated party consisted of a young
woman familiarly known as "The Duchess;" another who had won the title
of "Mother Shipton;" and "Uncle Billy," a suspected, sluice-robber and
confirmed drunkard. The cavalcade provoked no comments from the
spectators, nor was any word uttered by the escort. Only when the
gulch which marked the uttermost limit of Poker Flat was reached, the
leader spoke briefly and to the point. The exiles were forbidden to
return at the peril of their lives.

As the escort disappeared, their pent-up feelings found vent in a few
hysterical tears from the Duchess, some bad language from Mother
Shipton, and a Parthian volley of expletives from Uncle Billy. The
philosophic Oakhurst  alone remained silent. He listened calmly to
Mother Shipton's desire to cut somebody's heart out, to the repeated
statements of the Duchess that she would die in the road, and to the
alarming oaths that seemed to be bumped out of Uncle Billy as he rode
forward. With the easy good humor  characteristic of his class, he
insisted upon exchanging his own riding-horse, "Five-Spot," for the
sorry mule which the Duchess rode. But even this act did not draw the
party into any closer sympathy. The young woman readjusted her
somewhat draggled plumes with a feeble, faded coquetry; Mother Shipton
eyed the possessor of "Five-Spot" with malevolence, and Uncle Billy
included the whole party in one sweeping anathema.

The road to Sandy Bar--a camp that, not having as yet experienced the
regenerating influences of Poker Flat, consequently seemed to offer
some invitation to the emigrants--lay over a steep mountain range. It
was distant a day's severe travel. In that advanced season the party
soon passed out of the moist, temperate regions of the foothills into
the dry, cold, bracing air of the Sierras. The trail was narrow and
difficult. At noon the Duchess, rolling out of her saddle upon the
ground, declared her intention of going no farther, and the party
halted.

The spot was singularly wild and impressive. A wooded amphitheatre,
surrounded on three sides by precipitous cliffs of naked granite,
sloped gently toward the crest of another precipice that overlooked
the valley. It was, undoubtedly, the most suitable spot for a camp,
had camping been advisable. But Mr. Oakhurst knew that scarcely half
the journey to Sandy Bar was accomplished, and the party were not
equipped or provisioned for delay. This fact he pointed out to his
companions curtly, with a philosophic commentary on the folly of
"throwing up their hand before the game was played out." But they were
furnished with liquor, which in this emergency stood them in place of
food,  fuel, rest, and prescience. In spite of his remonstrances, it
was not long before they were more or less under its influence. Uncle
Billy passed rapidly from a bellicose state into one of stupor, the
Duchess became maudlin, and Mother Shipton snored. Mr. Oakhurst alone
remained erect, leaning against a rock, calmly surveying them.

Mr. Oakhurst did not drink. It interfered with a profession which
required coolness, impassiveness, and presence of mind, and, in his
own language, he "couldn't afford it." As he gazed at his recumbent
fellow exiles, the loneliness begotten of his pariah trade, his habits
of life, his very vices, for the first time seriously oppressed him.
He bestirred himself in dusting his black clothes, washing his hands
and face, and other acts characteristic of his studiously neat habits,
and for a moment forgot his annoyance. The thought of deserting his
weaker and more pitiable companions never perhaps occurred to him. Yet
he could not help feeling the want of that excitement which, singularly
enough, was most conducive to that calm equanimity for which he was
notorious. He looked at the gloomy walls that rose a thousand feet
sheer above the circling pines around him, at the sky ominously
clouded, at the valley below, already deepening into shadow; and,
doing so, suddenly he heard his own name called.

A horseman slowly ascended the trail. In the fresh, open face of the
newcomer Mr. Oakhurst recognized Tom Simson, otherwise known as "The
Innocent," of Sandy Bar. He had met him some months before over a
"little game," and had, with perfect equanimity, won the entire
fortune--amounting to some forty dollars--of that guileless youth.
After the game was finished, Mr. Oakhurst drew the youthful speculator
behind the door and thus addressed him: "Tommy, you're a good little
man, but you can't gamble worth a cent. Don't try it over again." He
then handed him his money hack, pushed him gently from the room, and
so made a devoted slave of Tom Simson.

There was a remembrance of this in his boyish and enthusiastic
greeting of Mr. Oakhurst. He had started, he said, to go to Poker Flat
to seek his fortune. "Alone?" No, not exactly alone; in fact (a
giggle), he had run away with Piney Woods. Didn't Mr. Oakhurst
remember Piney? She that used to wait on the table at the Temperance
House? They had been engaged a long time, but old Jake Woods had
objected, and so they had run away, and were going to Poker Flat to be
married, and here they were. And they were tired out, and how lucky it
was they had found a place to camp, and company. All this the Innocent
delivered rapidly, while Piney, a stout, comely damsel of fifteen,
emerged from behind the pine-tree, where she had been blushing unseen,
and rode to the side of her lover.

Mr. Oakhurst seldom troubled himself with sentiment, still less with
propriety; but he had a vague idea that the situation was not
fortunate. He retained, however, his presence of mind sufficiently to
kick Uncle Billy, who was about to say something, and Uncle Billy was
sober enough to recognize in Mr. Oakhurst's kick a superior power that
would not bear trifling. He then endeavored to dissuade Tom Simson
from delaying further, but in vain. He even pointed out the fact that
there was no provision, nor means of making a camp. But, unluckily,
the Innocent met this objection by assuring the party that he was
provided with an extra mule loaded with provisions, and by the
discovery of a rude attempt at a log house near the trail. "Piney can
stay with Mrs. Oakhurst," said the Innocent, pointing to the Duchess,
"and I can shift for myself."

Nothing but Mr. Oakhurst's admonishing foot saved Uncle Billy from
bursting into a roar of laughter. As it  was, he felt compelled to
retire up the canon until he could recover his gravity. There he
confided the joke to the tall pine-trees, with many slaps of his leg,
contortions of his face, and the usual profanity. But when he returned
to the party, he found them seated by a fire--for the air had grown
strangely chill and the sky overcast--in apparently amicable
conversation. Piney was actually talking in an impulsive girlish
fashion  to the Duchess, who was listening with an interest and
animation she had not shown for many days. The Innocent was holding
forth, apparently with equal effect, to Mr. Oakhurst and Mother
Shipton, who was actually relaxing into amiability. "Is this yer a d--
d picnic?" said Uncle Billy, with inward scorn, as he surveyed the
sylvan group, the glancing firelight, and the tethered animals in the
foreground. Suddenly an idea mingled with the alcoholic fumes that
disturbed his brain. It was apparently of a jocular nature, for he
felt impelled to slap his leg again and cram his fist into his mouth.

As the shadows crept slowly up the mountain, a slight breeze rocked
the tops of the pine-trees and moaned through their long and gloomy
aisles. The ruined cabin, patched and covered with pine boughs, was
set apart for the ladies. As the lovers parted, they unaffectedly
exchanged a kiss, so honest and sincere that it might have been heard
above the swaying pines. The frail Duchess and the malevolent Mother
Shipton were probably too stunned to remark upon this last evidence of
simplicity, and so turned without a word to the hut. The fire was
replenished, the men lay down before the door, and in a few minutes
were asleep.

Mr. Oakhurst was a light sleeper. Toward morning he awoke benumbed and
cold. As he stirred the dying fire, the wind, which was now blowing
strongly, brought to his cheek that which caused the blood to leave
it,--snow!

He started to his feet with the intention of awakening the sleepers,
for there was no time to lose. But turning to where Uncle Billy had
been lying, he found him gone. A suspicion leaped to his brain, and a
curse to his lips. He ran to the spot where the mules had been
tethered--they were no longer there. The tracks were already rapidly
disappearing in the snow.

The momentary excitement brought Mr. Oakhurst back to the fire with
his usual calm. He did not waken the sleepers. The Innocent slumbered
peacefully, with a smile on his good-humored, freckled face; the
virgin Piney slept beside her frailer sisters as sweetly as though
attended by celestial guardians; and Mr. Oakhurst, drawing his blanket
over his shoulders, stroked his mustaches and waited for the dawn. It
came slowly in a whirling mist of snowflakes that dazzled and confused
the eye. What could be seen of the landscape appeared magically
changed. He looked over the valley, and summed up the present and
future in two words, "Snowed in!"

A careful inventory of the provisions, which, fortunately for the
party, had been stored within the hut, and so escaped the felonious
fingers of Uncle Billy, disclosed the fact that with care and prudence
they might last ten days longer. "That is," said Mr. Oakhurst _sotto
voce_ to the Innocent, "if you're willing to board us. If you
ain't--and perhaps you'd better not--you can wait till Uncle Billy
gets back with provisions." For some occult reason, Mr. Oakhurst could
not bring himself to disclose Uncle Billy's rascality, and so offered
the hypothesis that he had wandered from the camp and had accidentally
stampeded the animals. He dropped a warning to the Duchess and Mother
Shipton, who of course knew the facts of their associate's defection.
"They'll find out the truth about us _all_ when they find out
anything," he added significantly, "and there's no good frightening
them now."

Tom Simson not only put all his worldly store at the  disposal of Mr.
Oakhurst, but seemed to enjoy the prospect of their enforced
seclusion. "We'll have a good camp for a week, and then the snow'll
melt, and we'll all go back together." The cheerful gayety of the
young man and Mr. Oakhurst's calm infected the others. The Innocent,
with the aid of pine boughs, extemporized a thatch for the roofless
cabin, and the Duchess directed Piney in the rearrangement of the
interior with a taste and tact that opened the blue eyes of that
provincial maiden to their fullest extent. "I reckon now you're used to
fine things at Poker Flat," said Piney. The Duchess turned away sharply
to conceal something that reddened her cheeks through their
professional tint, and Mother Shipton requested Piney not to "chatter."
But when Mr. Oakhurst returned from a weary search for the trail, he
heard the sound of happy laughter echoed from the rocks. He stopped in
some alarm, and his thoughts first naturally reverted to the whiskey,
which he had prudently cached. "And yet it don't somehow sound like
whiskey," said the gambler. It was not until he caught sight of the
blazing fire through the still blinding storm, and the group around
it, that he settled to the conviction that it was "square fun."

Whether Mr. Oakhurst had cached his cards with the whiskey as
something debarred the free access of the community, I cannot say. It
was certain that, in Mother Shipton's words, he "didn't say 'cards'
once" during that evening. Haply the time was beguiled by an
accordion, produced somewhat ostentatiously by Tom Simson from his
pack. Notwithstanding some difficulties attending the manipulation of
this instrument, Piney Woods managed to pluck several reluctant
melodies from its keys, to an accompaniment by the Innocent on a pair
of bone castanets. But the crowning festivity of the evening was
reached in a rude camp-meeting hymn, which the lovers, joining hands,
sang with great earnestness and vociferation. I fear that a  certain
defiant tone and Covenanter's swing to its chorus, rather than any
devotional quality, caused it speedily to infect the others, who at
last joined in the refrain:--

  "I'm proud to live in the service of the Lord, And I'm bound to die
  in His army."

The pines rocked, the storm eddied and whirled above the miserable
group, and the flames of their altar leaped heavenward, as if in token
of the vow.

At midnight the storm abated, the rolling clouds parted, and the stars
glittered keenly above the sleeping camp. Mr. Oakhurst, whose
professional habits had enabled him to live on the smallest possible
amount of sleep, in dividing the watch with Tom Simson somehow managed
to take upon himself the greater part of that duty. He excused himself
to the Innocent by saying that he had "often been a week without
sleep." "Doing what?" asked Tom. "Poker!" replied Oakhurst
sententiously. "When a man gets a streak of luck,--nigger-luck,--he
don't get tired. The luck gives in first. Luck," continued the gambler
reflectively, "is a mighty queer thing. All you know about it for
certain is that it's bound to change. And it's finding out when it's
going to change that makes you. We've had a streak of bad luck since
we left Poker Flat,--you come along, and slap you get into it, too. If
you can hold your cards right along you're all right. For," added the
gambler, with cheerful irrelevance--

  "'I'm proud to live in the service of the Lord, And I'm bound to die
  in His army.'"

The third day came, and the sun, looking through the white-curtained
valley, saw the outcasts divide their slowly decreasing store of
provisions for the morning meal. It was one of the peculiarities of
that mountain climate that its rays diffused a kindly warmth over the
wintry landscape, as if in regretful commiseration of the past. But it
revealed drift on drift of snow piled high around the hut,--a
hopeless, uncharted,  trackless sea of white lying below the rocky
shores to which the castaways still clung. Through the marvelously
clear air the smoke of the pastoral village of Poker Flat rose miles
away. Mother Shipton saw it, and from a remote pinnacle of her rocky
fastness hurled in that direction a final malediction. It was her last
vituperative attempt, and perhaps for that reason was invested with a
certain degree of sublimity. It did her good, she privately informed
the Duchess. "Just you go out there and cuss, and see." She then set
herself to the task of amusing "the child," as she and the Duchess
were pleased to call Piney. Piney was no chicken, but it was a
soothing and original theory of the pair thus to account for the fact
that she didn't swear and wasn't improper.

When night crept up again through the gorges, the reedy notes of the
accordion rose and fell in fitful spasms and long-drawn gasps by the
flickering campfire. But music failed to fill entirely the aching void
left by insufficient food, and a new diversion was proposed by Piney,
--story-telling. Neither Mr. Oakhurst nor his female companions caring
to relate their personal experiences, this plan would have failed too,
but for the Innocent. Some months before he had chanced upon a stray
copy of Mr. Pope's ingenious translation of the Iliad. He now proposed
to narrate the principal incidents of that poem--having thoroughly
mastered the argument and fairly forgotten the words--in the current
vernacular of Sandy Bar. And so for the rest of that night the Homeric
demigods again walked the earth. Trojan bully and wily Greek wrestled
in the winds, and the great pines in the canon seemed to bow to the
wrath of the son of Peleus. Mr. Oakhurst listened with quiet
satisfaction. Most especially was he interested in the fate of "Ash-
heels," as the Innocent persisted in denominating the "swift-footed
Achilles."

So, with small food and much of Homer and the accordion, a week passed
over the  heads of the outcasts. The sun again forsook them, and again
from leaden skies the snowflakes were sifted over the land. Day by day
closer around them drew the  snowy circle, until at last they looked
from their prison over drifted walls of dazzling white, that towered
twenty feet above their heads. It became more and more difficult to
replenish their fires, even from the fallen trees beside them, now
half hidden in the drifts. And yet no one complained. The lovers
turned from the dreary prospect and looked into each other's eyes, and
were happy. Mr. Oakhurst settled himself coolly to the losing game
before him. The Duchess, more cheerful than she had been, assumed the
care of Piney. Only Mother Shipton--once the strongest of the party--
seemed to sicken and fade. At midnight on the tenth day she called
Oakhurst to her side. "I'm going," she said, in a voice of querulous
weakness, "but don't say anything about it. Don't waken the kids. Take
the bundle from under my head, and open it." Mr. Oakhurst did so. It
contained Mother Shipton's rations for the last week, untouched. "Give
'em to the child," she said, pointing to the sleeping Piney. "You've
starved yourself," said the gambler. "That's what they call it," said
the woman querulously, as she lay down again, and, turning her face to
the wall, passed quietly away.

The accordion and the bones were put aside that day, and Homer was
forgotten. When the body of Mother Shipton had been committed to the
snow, Mr. Oakhurst took the Innocent aside, and showed him a pair of
snow-shoes, which he had fashioned from the old pack-saddle.

"There's one chance in a hundred to save her yet," he said, pointing
to Piney; "but it's there," he added, pointing toward Poker Flat. "If
you can reach there in two days she's safe." "And you?" asked Tom
Simson. "I'll stay here," was the curt reply.    The lovers parted
with a long embrace. "You are not going, too?" said the Duchess, as
she saw Mr. Oakhurst apparently waiting to accompany him. "As far as
the canon," he replied. He turned suddenly and kissed the Duchess,
leaving her pallid face aflame, and her trembling limbs rigid with
amazement.

Night came, but not Mr. Oakhurst. It brought the storm again and the
whirling snow. Then the Duchess, feeding the fire, found that some one
had quietly piled beside the hut enough fuel to last a few days
longer. The tears rose to her eyes, but she hid them from Piney.

The women slept but little. In the morning, looking into each other's
faces, they read their fate. Neither spoke, but Piney, accepting the
position of the stronger, drew near and placed her arm around the
Duchess's waist. They kept this attitude for the rest of the day. That
night the storm reached its greatest fury, and, rending asunder the
protecting vines, invaded the very hut.

Toward morning they found themselves unable to feed the fire, which
gradually died away. As the embers slowly blackened, the Duchess crept
closer to Piney, and broke the silence of many hours: "Piney, can you
pray?" "No, dear," said Piney simply. The Duchess, without knowing
exactly why, felt relieved, and, putting her head upon Piney's
shoulder, spoke no more. And so reclining, the younger and purer
pillowing the head of her soiled sister upon her virgin breast, they
fell asleep.

The wind lulled as if it feared to waken them. Feathery drifts of
snow, shaken from the long pine boughs, flew like white winged birds,
and settled about them as they slept. The moon through the rifted
clouds looked down upon what had been the camp. But all human stain,
all trace of earthly travail, was hidden beneath the spotless mantle
mercifully flung from above.

They slept all that day and the next, nor did they waken  when voices
and footsteps broke the silence of the camp. And when pitying fingers
brushed the snow from their wan faces, you could scarcely have told
from the equal peace that dwelt upon them which was she that had
sinned. Even the law of Poker Flat recognized this, and turned away,
leaving them still locked in each other's arms.

But at the head of the gulch, on one of the largest pine-trees, they
found the deuce of clubs pinned to the bark with a bowie-knife. It
bore the following, written in pencil in a firm hand:--

  BENEATH THIS TREE LIES THE BODY OF JOHN OAKHURST, WHO STRUCK A
  STREAK OF BAD LUCK ON THE 23D OF NOVEMBER 1850. AND HANDED IN HIS
  CHECKS ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 1850.

And pulseless and cold, with a Derringer by his side and a bullet in
his heart, though still calm as in life, beneath the snow lay he who
was at once the strongest and yet the weakest of the outcasts of Poker
Flat.


TENNESSEE'S PARTNER


I do not think that we ever knew his real name. Our ignorance of it
certainly never gave us any social  inconvenience, for at Sandy Bar in
1854 most men were christened anew. Sometimes these appellatives were
derived from some distinctiveness of dress, as in the case of
"Dungaree Jack;" or from some peculiarity of habit, as shown in
"Saleratus Bill," so called from an undue proportion of that chemical
in his daily bread; or from some unlucky slip, as exhibited in "The
Iron Pirate," a mild, inoffensive man, who earned that baleful title
by his unfortunate  mispronunciation of the term "iron pyrites."
Perhaps this may have been the beginning of a rude heraldry; but I am
constrained to think that it was because a man's real name in that day
rested solely upon his own unsupported statement. "Call yourself
Clifford, do you?" said Boston, addressing a timid newcomer with
infinite scorn; "hell is full of such Cliffords!" He then introduced
the unfortunate man, whose name happened to be really Clifford, as
"Jaybird Charley,"--an unhallowed inspiration of the moment that clung
to him ever after.

But to return to Tennessee's Partner, whom we never knew by any other
than this relative title. That he had ever existed as a separate and
distinct individuality we only learned later. It seems that in 1853 he
left Poker Flat to go to San Francisco, ostensibly to procure a wife.
He never got any farther than Stockton. At that place he was attracted
by a young person who waited upon the table at the hotel where he took
his meals. One morning he said  something to her which caused her to
smile not unkindly, to somewhat coquettishly break a plate of toast
over his upturned, serious, simple face, and to retreat to the
kitchen. He followed her, and emerged a few moments later, covered
with more toast and victory. That day week they were married by a
justice of the peace, and returned to Poker Flat. I am aware that
something more might be made of this episode, but I prefer to tell it
as it was current at Sandy Bar,--in the gulches and bar-rooms,--where
all sentiment was modified by a strong sense of humor.

Of their married felicity but little is known, perhaps for the reason
that Tennessee, then living with his partner, one day took occasion to
say something to the bride on his own account, at which, it is said,
she smiled not unkindly and chastely retreated,--this time as far as
Marysville, where Tennessee followed her, and where they went to
housekeeping without the aid of a justice of the peace. Tennessee's
Partner took the loss of his wife simply and seriously, as was his
fashion. But to everybody's surprise, when Tennessee one day returned
from Marysville, without his partner's wife,--she having smiled and
retreated with somebody else,--Tennessee's Partner was the first man
to shake his hand and greet him with affection. The boys who had
gathered in the canon to see the shooting were naturally indignant.
Their indignation might have found vent in sarcasm but for a certain
look in Tennessee's Partner's eye that indicated a lack of humorous
appreciation. In fact, he was a grave man, with a steady application
to practical detail which was unpleasant in a difficulty.

Meanwhile a popular feeling against Tennessee had grown up on the Bar.
He was known to be a gambler; he was suspected to be a thief. In these
suspicions Tennessee's Partner was equally compromised; his continued
intimacy with Tennessee after the affair above quoted could only be
accounted for on the hypothesis of a copartnership  of crime. At last
Tennessee's guilt became flagrant. One day he overtook a stranger on
his way to Red Dog. The stranger afterward related that Tennessee
beguiled the time with interesting anecdote and reminiscence, but
illogically concluded the interview in the following words: "And now,
young man, I'll trouble you for your knife, your pistols, and your
money. You see your weppings might get you into trouble at Red Dog,
and your money's a temptation to the evilly disposed. I think you said
your address was San Francisco. I shall endeavor to call." It may be
stated here that Tennessee had a fine flow of humor, which no business
preoccupation could wholly subdue.

This exploit was his last. Red Dog and Sandy Bar made common cause
against the highwayman. Tennessee was hunted in very much the same
fashion as his prototype, the grizzly. As the toils closed around him,
he made a desperate dash through the Bar, emptying his revolver at the
crowd before the Arcade Saloon, and so on up Grizzly Canon; but at its
farther extremity he was stopped by a small man on a gray horse. The
men looked at each other a moment in silence. Both were fearless, both
self-possessed and independent, and both types of a civilization that
in the seventeenth century would have been called heroic, but in the
nineteenth simply "reckless."

"What have you got there?--I call," said Tennessee quietly.

"Two bowers and an ace," said the stranger as quietly, showing two
revolvers and a bowie-knife.

"That takes me," returned Tennessee; and, with this gambler's epigram,
he threw away his useless pistol and rode back with his captor.

It was a warm night. The cool breeze which usually sprang up with the
going down of the sun behind the chaparral-crested mountain was that
evening withheld from    Sandy Bar. The little canon was stifling with
heated resinous odors, and the decaying driftwood on the Bar sent
forth faint sickening exhalations. The feverishness of day and its
fierce passions still filled the camp. Lights moved restlessly along
the bank of the river, striking no answering reflection from its tawny
current. Against the blackness of the pines the windows of the old
loft above the express-office stood out staringly bright; and through
their curtainless panes the loungers below could see the forms of
those who were even then deciding the fate of Tennessee. And above all
this, etched on the dark firmament, rose the Sierra, remote and
passionless, crowned with remoter passionless stars.

The trial of Tennessee was conducted as fairly as was consistent with
a judge and jury who felt themselves to some extent obliged to
justify, in their verdict, the previous irregularities of arrest and
indictment. The law of Sandy Bar was implacable, but not vengeful. The
excitement and personal feeling of the chase were over; with Tennessee
safe in their hands, they were ready to listen patiently to any
defense, which they were already satisfied was insufficient. There
being no doubt in their own minds, they were willing to give the
prisoner the benefit of any that might exist. Secure in the hypothesis
that he ought to be hanged on general principles, they indulged him
with more latitude of defense than his reckless hardihood seemed to
ask. The Judge appeared to be more anxious than the prisoner, who,
otherwise unconcerned, evidently took a grim pleasure in the
responsibility he had created. "I don't take any hand in this yer
game," had been his invariable but good-humored reply to all
questions. The Judge--who was also his captor--for a moment vaguely
regretted that he had not shot him "on sight" that morning, but
presently dismissed this human weakness as unworthy of the judicial
mind. Nevertheless, when there was a tap at  the door, and it was said
that Tennessee's Partner was there on behalf of the prisoner, he was
admitted at once without question. Perhaps the younger members of the
jury, to whom the proceedings were becoming irksomely thoughtful,
hailed him as a relief.

For he was not, certainly, an imposing figure. Short and stout, with a
square face, sunburned into a preternatural redness, clad in a loose
duck "jumper" and trousers streaked and splashed with red soil, his
aspect under any circumstances would have been quaint, and was now
even ridiculous. As he stooped to deposit at his feet a heavy
carpetbag he was carrying, it became obvious, from partially developed
legends and inscriptions, that the material with which his trousers
had been patched had been originally intended for a less ambitious
covering. Yet he advanced with great gravity, and after shaking the
hand of each person in the room with labored cordiality, he wiped his
serious perplexed face on a red bandana handkerchief, a shade lighter
than his complexion, laid his powerful hand upon the table to steady
himself, and thus addressed the Judge:--

"I was passin' by," he began, by way of apology, "and I thought I'd
just step in and see how things was gittin' on with Tennessee thar,--
my pardner. It's a hot night. I disremember any sich weather before on
the Bar."

He paused a moment, but nobody volunteering any other meteorological
recollection, he again had recourse to his pocket-handkerchief, and
for some moments mopped his face diligently.

"Have you anything to say on behalf of the prisoner?" said the Judge
finally.

"Thet's it," said Tennessee's Partner, in a tone of relief. "I come
yar as Tennessee's pardner,--knowing him nigh on four year, off and
on, wet and dry, in luck and out o' luck. His ways ain't aller my
ways, but thar ain't any p'ints in that young man, thar ain't any
liveliness as he's  been up to, as I don't know. And you sez to me,
sez you,--confidential-like, and between man and man,--sez you, 'Do
you know anything in his behalf?' and I sez to you, sez I,--
confidential-like, as between man and man,--'What should a man know of
his pardner?'"

"Is this all you have to say?" asked the Judge impatiently, feeling,
perhaps, that a dangerous sympathy of humor was beginning to humanize
the court.

"Thet's so," continued Tennessee's Partner." It ain't for me to say
anything agin' him. And now, what's the case? Here's Tennessee wants
money, wants it bad, and doesn't like to ask it of his old pardner.
Well, what does Tennessee do? He lays for a stranger, and he fetches
that stranger; and you lays for _him_, and you fetches _him_; and the
honors is easy. And I put it to you, bein' a fa'r-minded man, and to
you, gentlemen all, as fa'r-minded men, ef this isn't so."

"Prisoner," said the Judge, interrupting, "have you any questions to
ask this man?"

"No! no!" continued Tennessee's Partner hastily. "I play this yer hand
alone. To come down to the bed-rock, it's just this: Tennessee, thar,
has played it pretty rough and expensive-like on a stranger, and on
this yer camp. And now, what's the fair thing? Some would say more,
some would say less. Here's seventeen hundred dollars in coarse gold
and a watch,--it's about all my pile,--and call it square!" And before
a hand could be raised to prevent him, he had emptied the contents of
the carpetbag upon the table.

For a moment his life was in jeopardy. One or two men sprang to their
feet, several hands groped for hidden weapons, and a suggestion to
"throw him from the window"  was only overridden by a gesture from the
Judge. Tennessee laughed. And apparently oblivious of the excitement,
Tennessee's Partner improved the opportunity to mop his face again
with his handkerchief.   When order was restored, and the man was made
to understand, by the use of forcible figures and rhetoric, that
Tennessee's offense could not be condoned by money, his face took a
more serious and sanguinary hue, and those who were nearest to him
noticed that his rough hand trembled slightly on the table. He
hesitated a moment as he slowly returned the gold to the carpetbag, as
if he had not yet entirely caught the elevated sense of justice which
swayed the tribunal, and was perplexed with the belief that he had not
offered enough. Then he turned to the Judge, and saying, "This yer is
a lone hand, played alone, and without my pardner," he bowed to the
jury and was about to withdraw, when the Judge called him back:--

"If you have anything to say to Tennessee, you had better say it now."

For the first time that evening the eyes of the prisoner and his
strange advocate met. Tennessee smiled, showed his white teeth, and
saying, "Euchred, old man!" held out his hand. Tennessee's Partner
took it in his own, and saying, "I just dropped in as I was passin' to
see how things was gettin' on," let the hand passively fall, and
adding that "it was a warm night," again mopped his face with his
handkerchief, and without another word withdrew.

The two men never again met each other alive. For the unparalleled
insult of a bribe offered to Judge Lynch--who, whether bigoted, weak,
or narrow, was at least incorruptible--firmly fixed in the mind of
that mythical personage any wavering determination of Tennessee's
fate; and at the break of day he was marched, closely guarded, to meet
it at the top of Marley's Hill.

How he met it, how cool he was, how he refused to say anything, how
perfect were the arrangements of the committee, were all duly
reported, with the addition of a warning moral and example to all
future evil-doers, in the "Red Dog Clarion," by its editor, who was
present, and to whose vigorous English I cheerfully refer the reader.
But the  beauty of that midsummer morning, the blessed amity of earth
and air and sky, the awakened life of the free woods and hills, the
joyous renewal and promise of Nature, and above all, the infinite
serenity that thrilled through each, was not reported, as not being a
part of the social lesson. And yet, when the weak and foolish deed was
done, and a life, with its possibilities and responsibilities, had
passed out of the misshapen thing that dangled between earth and sky,
the birds sang, the flowers bloomed, the sun shone, as cheerily as
before; and possibly the "Red Dog Clarion" was right.

Tennessee's Partner was not in the group that surrounded the ominous
tree. But as they turned to disperse, attention was drawn to the
singular appearance of a motionless donkey-cart halted at the side of
the road. As they approached, they at once recognized the venerable
"Jenny" and the two-wheeled cart as the property of Tennessee's
Partner, used by him in carrying dirt from his claim; and a few paces
distant the owner of the equipage himself, sitting under a buckeye-
tree, wiping the perspiration from his glowing face. In answer to an
inquiry, he said he had come for the body of the "diseased," "if it
was all the same to the committee." He didn't wish to "hurry
anything;"  he could "wait." He was not working that day; and when the
gentlemen were done with the "diseased," he would take him. "Ef thar
is any present," he added, in his simple, serious way, "as would care
to jine in the fun'l, they kin come." Perhaps it was from a sense of
humor, which I have already intimated was a feature of Sandy Bar,--
perhaps it was from something even better than that, but two thirds of
the loungers accepted the invitation at once.

It was noon when the body of Tennessee was delivered into the hands of
his partner. As the cart drew up to the fatal tree, we noticed that it
contained a rough oblong box,--apparently made from a section of
sluicing,--and half filled with bark and the tassels of pine. The cart
was further decorated with slips of willow and made fragrant with
buckeye-blossoms. When the body was deposited in the box, Tennessee's
Partner drew over it a piece of tarred canvas, and gravely mounting
the narrow seat in front, with his feet upon the shafts, urged the
little donkey forward. The equipage moved slowly on, at that decorous
pace which was habitual with Jenny even under less solemn
circumstances. The men--half curiously, half jestingly, but all good-
humoredly--strolled along beside the cart, some in advance, some a
little in the rear of the homely catafalque. But whether from the
narrowing of the road or some present sense of decorum, as the cart
passed on, the company fell to the rear in couples, keeping step, and
otherwise assuming the external show of a formal procession. Jack
Folinsbee, who had at the outset played a funeral march in dumb show
upon an imaginary trombone, desisted from a lack of sympathy and
appreciation,--not having, perhaps, your true humorist's capacity to
be content with the enjoyment of his own fun.

The way led through Grizzly Canon, by this time clothed in funereal
drapery and shadows. The redwoods, burying their moccasined feet in
the red soil, stood in Indian file along the track, trailing an
uncouth benediction from their bending boughs upon the passing bier. A
hare, surprised into helpless inactivity, sat upright and pulsating in
the ferns by the roadside as the cortege went by. Squirrels hastened
to gain a secure outlook from higher boughs; and the blue-jays,
spreading their wings, fluttered before them like outriders, until the
outskirts of Sandy Bar were reached, and the solitary cabin of
Tennessee's Partner.

Viewed under more favorable circumstances, it would not have been a
cheerful place. The unpicturesque site, the rude and unlovely
outlines, the unsavory details, which  distinguish the nest-building
of the California miner, were all here with the dreariness of decay
superadded. A few paces from the cabin there was a rough inclosure,
which, in the brief days of Tennessee's Partner's matrimonial
felicity, had been used as a garden, but was now overgrown with fern.
As we approached it, we were surprised to find that what we had taken
for a recent attempt at cultivation was the broken soil about an open
grave.

The cart was halted before the inclosure, and rejecting the offers of
assistance with the same air of simple self-reliance he had displayed
throughout, Tennessee's Partner lifted the rough coffin on his back,
and deposited it unaided within the shallow grave. He then nailed down
the board which served as a lid, and mounting the little mound of
earth beside it, took off his hat and slowly mopped his face with his
handkerchief. This the crowd felt was a preliminary to speech, and
they disposed themselves variously on stumps and boulders, and sat
expectant.

"When a man," began Tennessee's Partner slowly," has been running free
all day, what's the natural thing for him to do? Why, to come home.
And if he ain't in a condition to go home, what can his best friend
do? Why, bring him home. And here's Tennessee has been running free,
and we brings him home from his wandering. "He paused and picked up a
fragment of quartz, rubbed it thoughtfully on his sleeve, and went on:
"It ain't the first time that I've packed him on my back, as you see'd
me now. It ain't the first time that I brought him to this yer cabin
when he couldn't help himself; it ain't the first time that I and
Jinny have waited for him on yon hill, and picked him up and so
fetched him home, when he couldn't speak and didn't know me. And now
that it's the last time, why"--he paused and rubbed the quartz gently
on his sleeve--"you see it's sort of rough on his pardner. And  now,
gentlemen" he added abruptly, picking up his long-handled shovel, "the
fun'l's over; and my thanks, and Tennessee's thanks, to you for your
trouble."

Resisting any proffers of assistance, he began to fill in the grave,
turning his back upon the crowd, that after a few moments' hesitation
gradually withdrew. As they crossed the little ridge that hid Sandy
Bar from view, some, looking back, thought they could see Tennessee's
Partner, his work done, sitting upon the grave, his shovel between his
knees, and his face buried in his red bandana handkerchief. But it was
argued by others that you couldn't tell his face from his handkerchief
at that distance, and this point remained undecided.

In the reaction that followed the feverish excitement of that day,
Tennessee's Partner was not forgotten. A secret investigation had
cleared him of any complicity in Tennessee's guilt, and left only a
suspicion of his general sanity. Sandy Bar made a point of calling on
him, and proffering various uncouth but well-meant kindnesses. But
from that day his rude health and great strength seemed visibly to
decline; and when the rainy season fairly set in, and the tiny grass-
blades were beginning to peep from the rocky mound above Tennessee's
grave, he took to his bed.

One night, when the pines beside the cabin were swaying in the storm
and trailing their slender fingers over the roof, and the roar and
rush of the swollen river were heard below, Tennessee's Partner lifted
his head from the pillow, saying, "It is time to go for Tennessee; I
must put Jinny in the cart;" and would have risen from his bed but for
the restraint of his attendant. Struggling, he still pursued his
singular fancy: "There, now, steady, Jinny,--steady, old girl. How
dark it is! Look out for the ruts,--and look out for him, too, old
gal. Sometimes, you know, when he's blind drunk, he drops down right
in the trail. Keep on  straight up to the pine on the top of the hill.
Thar! I told you so!--thar he is,--coming this way, too,--all by
himself, sober, and his face a-shining. Tennessee! Pardner!"

And so they met.


