CULTURE AND HEALTHby Mervyn Claxton The preamble to the World Health Organisation's (WHO) Constitution states that "Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity". Throughout human history, societies have had particular perceptions of health and disease rooted in their own culture, and which have led to a plurality of practices for disease prevention and cure. The ancient Chinese approach to health grew out of their philosophy's dualistic cosmic theory of the yin and the yang. The forces of yin and yang act in the human body as they do throughout the natural universe as a whole. Disease, or physical disharmony, is caused by an imbalance or undue preponderance of these two forces in the body, and the goal of Chinese medicine was to bring the yin and yang back into balance with each other, thus restoring the person to good health. All other ancient and traditional medical systems shared a holistic approach to health care, emphasizing the importance of maintaining, or restoring, a harmonious balance within the patient or between the patient and his environment. In Ayurveda (Science of Life), India's traditional medicine, health is described as the achievement of dhatusamya - the equilibrium of sustaining and nourishing factors. The traditional African approach to healing locates the origins of a disease within the social context of the afflicted individual, and in the Zulu concept Ukuzilungiza, health is not a state but a continuous activity, an endeavour to restore order where there has been disorder. For the North American Navajos, disease is considered a disruption of harmony caused either by external agents or by the breaking of taboos. One of the principles emphasized by Hippocrates, the 5th century BC Greek physician who has been called the father of medicine, is that disease is often the result of environmental forces - diet, climate and occupation. In traditional Tibetan medicine, the essence of health is holistic harmony in which the microcosm of the body and the macrocosm of the Universe are constantly in balance with each other. Disease results when this balance is upset. In every language there are expressions which describe the degree of vitality of an individual as well as the degree of aliveness and uniqueness. There are also expressions which describe an individual's ability or lack of ability to cope with his environment. In each language these expressions reflect an experience of life, specific to the particular culture, which would have given rise to its own style of suffering, of dealing with death or of bearing pain or disability. Classical Chinese medicine, for example, concerned itself with restoring normal function as distinct from treating specific symptoms such as, for example, the elimination or reduction of pain. The modern, abstract term "health", which covers the range of conditions from excellent health to bad health, is foreign to most cultures. Modern Western civilization differs from other civilizations, as well as from classical Greek civilization, in assuming that there is one health - a universal type of health which is maintained by health services to be delivered to people. The lack of universality of health experience is demonstrated by the fact that there are even certain types of illnesses which are specific to certain ethnic groups and not to others e.g. Tay-Sachs disease (a hereditary metabolic disorder resulting in early childhood death) which afflicts certain groups of Eastern European origin, and sickle-cell anaemia which affects Africans and people of African origin. These specifically cultural health experiences extend to the protection against tuberculosis associated with the genes that dispose certain groups to Tay-Sachs disease, and to the protection that the sickle-cell gene provides against malaria. Human bodies are not identical, all equally threatened by the germs around them. The discovery of how the immune system works has underlined the uniqueness of each human body, which medicine cannot protect simply by identifying the cause of each disease and waging war on it. The individual can no longer be treated as a machine that infallibly obeys strict rules. The discovery of allergies, for example, has emphasized how individuals differ in their sensitivity, and the recognition of the influence of stress on health indicates that reactions are never wholly predictable. In virtually all societies, including Western societies, different medical systems co-exist, based on different culturally-determined and sometimes conflicting interpretations of health, disease and health behaviour. In India, for example, the three main traditional, medical systems - Ayurveda, Unani and Siddah - co-exist with the Western medical system. Western medical science is largely based on the premise that health and disease can be universally defined by objective diagnostic criteria, but even in Western countries there are distinct differences in the diagnosis and treatment of specific diseases which cannot be explained alone by differences in the health of their populations. The far greater number of surgical operations in the United States, as compared with the practice in European countries, reflects an "aggressive" approach more consonant with American culture than with European culture. Different European countries tend to place greater importance on the role of particular organs as a major source of ill health or of concern. In the case of Germany it is the heart, for France it is the liver, and for Britain it is the bowels. Norway is able to provide good health care to its population with little more than 1000 brands of medicine available, while the United Kingdom makes available some 20,000 brands, Germany 24,000 and Italy 21,000. The number of prescription drugs issued in France is the highest in the European Community, and the number of medical x-rays annually performed (50 million, according to the French medical journal Impact Médecin) is the highest in the world, with no observable difference in the health of the population as compared with other developed countries. France also holds the world record for the consumption of tranquilizers and sleeping pills. Most Western doctors view any given disease as having a single cause, and seek an absolute change, or cure, through technology. Modern medicine's central promise, and goal, of eliminating disease and of regarding death as a frontier to be pushed back by technical means, affirms a world view that places ultimate value in the growth of technological development. The Western doctor basically diagnoses and treats an isolated individual. Patients are viewed as inherently separated from one another and from their surroundings, and health care is reduced from being the balanced input of a good environment, healthy nutrition and necessary medicine, to being merely the provision of medicine. Such an approach may well be the fundamental cause of the relative failure of Western attempts at developing community medicine. The traditional approach to health care, in non-Western cultures, is based on a different perception of the nature of illness and of the healing process, which has emphasized the need to perceive patients as whole persons and to treat them accordingly, rather than merely targeting a specific symptom or presumed cause of ill health. It recognizes the psychological, environmental and social contributions to disease, the active involvement of the patient in the treatment process, and places emphasis on preventive medicine and on lifestyles that lessen the probability of developing disease. In India, China, Africa and other parts of the developing world, medical systems have regarded drugs and medicines as only a partial treatment for disease, with complementary treatment at the nutritional and environmental levels. These systems have, also, traditionally rejected the distinction of mind and body in their approach to the treatment of illnesses. Western scientific medicine traces its origin to Hippocrates, whose views on health closely resembled those of traditional medicine elsewhere. It was only in the 19th century that Western medicine diverged, coming to regard ill health as consisting of a specific set of symptoms, defined as a specific disease, which is cured by the precise treatment for that condition. Modern scientific medicine found itself in competition with traditional medicine, a struggle which ended with a victory for the former, largely due to the spectacular success of new drugs such as aspirin, quinine and digitalis - extracted, ironically, from the very plants used in traditional medicine. A resurgence of interest in traditional medicine and in its holistic approach to health and to illness took place, in the West, in the late 1960s, largely as a reaction to the increasing role, in health care, of expensive and depersonalizing medical technology, and of a nearly universal dependence on technology and drugs in the diagnosis and treatment of disease. While the 19th century concept of a physician was regarded as having been basically humanistic, critics of more recent developments have charged that medical technology has led modern physicians to treat organs rather than whole persons. In addition, it has become clear that many chronic conditions that are related to lifestyle, such as back pain, migraines, neuralgia, allergic conditions and stress-related disorders could be more effectively treated by the gentler, more integrated approach of alternative or complementary medicine. Large numbers of people, for example, have obtained relief from stress by practicing simplified versions of Yoga. The importance of such success in dealing with a medical complaint for which modern medicine has no effective remedy is illustrated by a 1993 report of the International Labour Organisation which estimated that stress-related illnesses cost American industry 200 billion dollars a year - the equivalent of the combined annual profits of the 500 wealthiest American companies. Furthermore, American doctors specializing in work-related illnesses have noted that absences on medical leave as a result of stress-related illnesses are longer, and the relapse rate is higher, than those caused by cardiac diseases or back ailments. ¹ A survey conducted in the Netherlands in 1980 found that 40% of the patients of practitioners of complementary or alternative medicine had sought their help because of prior inadequate or unsuccessful treatment of the same ailment by medical doctors. This finding ¹ Le Monde, 19 September, 1995. was subsequently confirmed by a government-sponsored study in Australia which showed that clinics practicing unorthodox medicine attracted patients through real need, not merely through belief in the desirability of alternative medicine. A 1993 Harvard University study revealed that fully one third of all Americans pursue some kind of alternative care each year. The Preventive Medicine Research Institute in Sausalito, California, also published, in 1993, results of research conducted which showed that a lifestyle-based regimen could not only prevent heart disease but also reverse it, without drugs or surgery. The growing popular trend towards alternative medicine, its apparent success in areas where modern scientific medicine has failed, and the astronomical costs of the latter in the United States, are persuading an increasing number of American health insurance companies to reimburse the costs of such treatment on the same basis as that of modem medical treatment. According to WHO's World Health Report 1995, lifestyle-related diseases and conditions are responsible for 70-80 % of deaths in developed countries and about 40 % in the developing world. Examples are cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, chronic bronchitis, obesity, alcohol and drug dependency, and sexually transmitted diseases. The report points out that behaviour is of importance to health either directly, through learned lifestyles, or indirectly in the environmental and socioeconomic context, and that personal choice of behaviour can be one of several risk factors, acting in combination, to cause a disease, e.g. poor diet, lack of exercise, and smoking, which all contribute to cardiovascular diseases. The WHO report underlines the fact that changing people's behaviour requires an understanding of the practice and reasons that underly it as well as a clear idea of the preferred behaviour. It suggests that the aim of health promotion policies and programmes should be to stimulate health awareness and responsibility and to advocate conditions which favour health. The findings of the WHO report and the results of the research carried out by the Preventive Medicine Research Institute in California point to the need for a socio-cultural redefinition of the basic medical concept of health. The Cultural Origins of Modern Medicine Ancient man did not at first regard death and disease as natural phenomena. Common illnesses such as colds were accepted as a normal part of existence and were treated with herbal remedies. Serious and disabling diseases were considered differently. They were regarded as being supernatural in origin - the result of a spell cast by an enemy, a visitation by an evil demon, or the work of an offended god. Magic and religion played a large part in the medicine of primitive and prehistoric man, and the administration of a herbal drug or remedy was usually accompanied by incantations and dancing. The first doctors or "medicine men" were, therefore, witch doctors or sorcerers who made free use of charms and talismans in their work, but who also treated the whole person, soul as well as body. In several civilizations of later date, priests were also "medicine men". In ancient Israel, for example, the practice of medicine was one of the duties of the priesthood. In Mahayana Buddhism, medicine became one of the five major subjects a monk was required to study and master. The close links between religion and medicine in Buddhism are illustrated by the fact that the greatest of the Mahayana philosopher-saints were also great physicians who wrote important medical works. Foremost among these was Nagarjuna, an Indian of the 1st century AD, who was both author of a major medical work, The Hundred Prescriptions, and founder of the doctrine and philosophy of the void upon which the entire higher Mahayana and Vajrayana (Tantric Buddhism) teachings are based. From the time of the earliest human cultures, pathological disturbances of mind and spirit have been given religious interpretations. Theories of possession by evil spirits have been documented in all early cultures, and are also to be found in the world's major religions. Indeed, possession by evil spirits is the oldest "pre-rational" medical theory - a natural way of understanding some of the pathological disorders of personality and behaviour which characterize mental disease. The transition from magic to medical science was a gradual process that lasted for centuries. In the West, this great advance in thought took place in Greece during the 5th and 4th centuries BC, and represented the first attempt at a rational, scientific theory of disease causation. In this respect, Greece inherited much from Babylonia, Egypt and even India and China. Hippocrates (born 460 BC) is credited with being the first person in the West to adopt the concept that disease was not a visitation of the gods but was caused, instead, by earthly influences. In spite of this early advance, however, doctors continued using, up to the 16th century, the Italian version of the word "influence" to describe the medical effects of an unfortunate astral "influence" (influenza). At first it meant any sudden visitation of an epidemic disease, and was a synonym for epidemic until the present use of the term "influenza" for the illness, now known by that name, began to appear in the 18th century. There is historical evidence which indicates that Indian medicine made a similar advance, several centuries before the Christian era, from magico-religious health remedies to rational therapeutics. This development ushered in a wide range of theoretical and practical propositions based on the fundamental postulate of the unity of man and nature. Hippocrates noted the effect of food, of occupation and especially of climate in causing disease, and in one of his works, "De acre, aquis et locis" (Air, Water and Places) he made the first systematic attempt to set forth a causal relationship between human diseases and the environment, a work which would today be considered to be a treatise on human ecology and which, until the new sciences of bacteriology and immunology emerged well into the 19th century, provided a theoretical basis for the comprehension of endemic and epidemic disease. Non-Western treatises on medicine, however, antedate by far the works of Hippocrates. A 4000 year old tablet, unearthed in the ruins of the Sumerian city of Nippur, is considered to be the world's oldest treatise on medicine. The Ebers papyrus and the Smith papyrus, dating from about 1600 BC, are the oldest known Egyptian medical texts. Although the Ebers papyrus includes incantations for specific illnesses as well as invocations to the gods, careful case histories and valuable prescriptions, such as castor oil as a cathartic, and tannic acid for bums, were also recorded. It also includes a surprisingly accurate description of the circulatory system, noting the existence of blood vessels throughout the body and the heart's function as center of the blood supply. The Smith papyrus, although dating 1100 years before Hippocrates' major medical treatise and believed to be a copy of a text originally written around 2500 BC, includes surgical advice that remains pertinent today, such as the use of compression to stop bleeding as well as advice on diseases of the eye, the heart and other internal organs. The practices outlined resemble those of modem medicine - defining the disease, stating its symptoms, indicating what the physician should find upon examination, suggesting therapy and giving a prognosis. Hippocrates' Egyptian counterpart was Imhotep, who lived about 2800 BC and is considered to be the greatest ancient Egyptian physician. He was later worshiped as the God of Medicine in Egypt and in Greece, where he was identified with the Greek God of medicine, Asclepius. The earliest known document of Chinese traditional medicine is the Nei Ching, written in the 3rd century BC and ascribed to the Yellow Emperor, Huang-ti, which describes, inter alia, the human anatomy including the circulation of the blood. The earliest concepts of Indian medicine are set out in the sacred writings called the Vedas and probably date as far back as the second millenium BC. The first two great Indian physicians, Charaka (circa 1000 BC) and Sushruta (5th century AD) both wrote encyclopedic medical treatises called Samhitas. Charaka's work, which has survived to our time, has been described in the following terms: "[It] stands as the finest [medical] document of the creative period of the last centuries before the beginning of our era, both in regard to the extent of its contents and to its state of preservation". With respect to Ancient India's skill in surgery a modern commentator writes: "The vast variety of Indian surgical instruments which have come down to us from the first millenium AD suggest that surgery had developed to an extraordinary extent in early India. The sutures and needles described in the Sushruta texts of several thousand years earlier looked no different [to those used during the 19th and 20th centuries]. Straight and bent needles of bone and bronze were used". The oldest known laws, relating to the practice of medicine, form part of the Code of Hammurabi, a Babylonian king of the 18th century BC, which is inscribed on a stela to be found in the art collection of the Louvre Museum in Paris. The Code stipulates draconian penalties for what would today be considered medical malpractice. "If the doctor, in opening an abscess, shall kill the patient, his hands shall be cut off. " If, however, the patient was a slave, the doctor was simply obliged to supply another slave. One of the many social ordinances of Ashoka, Emperor of India in the 3rd century BC, was one on medicine. It was also inscribed on a stela, and provided for the establishment of hospitals for both humans and animals, as well as the cultivation of medicinal plants. Ashoka's hospitals predated similar institutions in the West by many centuries. In the 7th century, the Tibetan Buddhist king, Srongtsan Gampo, organized, in Tibet, the first ever international medical conference. Doctors from India, Persia and China attended the conference, and each presented to the king a Tibetan translation of one of his country's medical books. The doctors, also, in a joint endeavour, composed a new medical treatise for the king. Culture, Health and Hygiene Most of the world's primitive peoples have practiced cleanliness and personal hygiene, often for religious reasons and, apparently, because of their wish to be pure in the eyes of their gods. The Old Testament has many adjurations and prohibitions about clean and unclean living, and Hebrew custom placed great emphasis on public health and sanitation, codifying these practices in the Pentateuch and Talmud as prescribed by Moses. In Islam, physical hygiene, through ritual washing of hands, feet and parts of the face before prayer became an important religious obligation. The spread of Mahayana Buddhism to China, Japan and the Indianized kingdoms of South-East Asia had a beneficial effect on public health in those countries. As late as 1186 AD hospitals were established in the Khmer Kingdom under the spiritual guidance of Bhaishajyaguru, the Medicine Buddha. In Ayurvedic medicine, great importance had always been placed on hygienic living. Well before the development of Ayurveda, the Dravidians of the Indus valley culture appreciated the value of hygiene. Mohenjodaro, the 5000 year old Indus valley city state, first excavated in 1927, had two storey houses with drains and private wells as well as a great public bath with its own well and drainage system. The city state's sanitary system was not equalled by London until the 19th century. The decline in standards of hygiene in Christian Europe during the whole of the Middle Ages was later to have catastrophic consequences. Christian custom and teaching, unlike that of Judaism and Islam, presented no barriers to such a decline. "St. Jerome, the 4th century ecclesiastic whose writings exercised great influence throughout the Middle Ages, proclaimed that if one "bathed in Christ" there was no need for any other form of cleansing". In the General Index (compiled in 1788) to the six volumes of Edward Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, the entry for Sylvania, sister of the Roman praefect Rufinus, describes her as "the studious virgin [who] had diligently . . . perused the commentators on the Bible . . . to the amount of five million lines. At the age of threescore, she could boast that she had never washed her hands, face or any part of her whole body, except the tips of her fingers, to receive the communion". It was the Christian knights, influenced by Arab customs during the Crusades, who, on their return to Europe, introduced the habit of bathing. The returning crusaders built new homes, or modernized their castles, in which they constructed special rooms so that they could indulge in their newly-acquired habit. The relative unimportance given to personal and public hygiene greatly contributed to the disastrous consequences of the plague, known as the Black Death, which swept Europe in the middle of the 14th century. Some twenty-five million people, amounting to a quarter of Europe's population, died in the Great Epidemic and, in some parts of the continent, as many as two-thirds or three-quarters of the population were afflicted. Spurred by the Black Death, the city state of Venice introduced the first systematic quarantine regulations, and public authorities in Europe made major efforts to improve sanitation, including the development of pure water supplies as well as systems of garbage and sewage disposal. Culture, Disease and Empire Malaria Malaria is one of the world's most widespread and devastating diseases. More than a half of the world's population live in endemic areas, and there are an estimated two million deaths a year from the disease. The disease has been known since Ancient times, and as far back as the 5th century BC, the Greeks had established a connection between malaria and swamps, but did not discover the real cause of the disease. As early as the 5th century AD, the great Indian physician, Sushruta, had established the connection between malaria and mosquitoes but, for centuries, people had sought in vain a remedy for malaria which, throughout history, has probably caused more deaths than any other disease. The Atharva Veda, one of the four ancient Vedas, which is considered to be the source of all Ayurveda, speaks of the use of an unidentified plant, Kushta, to combat malarial fever, and the Chinese Emperor and botanist, Chi'en Nung (circa 2700 BC), recommended cannabis for the treatment of malaria in his pharmacopoeia, the Pen Tsao Ching. It was the Jivaro Indians, living in the Amazonian jungle, who taught the world how to combat malaria with quinine, an alkaloid extracted from the bark of the chinchona tree, which is native to the Andes. For three centuries, up to the Second World war, quinine was the most important anti-malarial drug in the world, and it is doubtful whether European expansion into tropical climates would have been successful without this important gift, to the West, of the Jivaro Indians. The plant, chinchona, was named after the Countess of Chinchon, wife of the Spanish Viceroy of Peru, who is supposed to have been cured of malarial fever in 1636. The "miracle" bark was introduced into Europe by the Jesuits and was sold as "Jesuits' powder" in England from 1641. Its Jesuit connections, however, made it suspect to protestants, and in England Oliver Cromwell, dying of malaria, is said to have refused the "Popish remedy". Until the 1850s, all the world's chinchona bark came from the forests of Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador and Colombia, where the trees grew wild. The Dutch introduced the chinchona plant to Java in 1854, and the British did the same in India in 1860. After its introduction to India, British soldiers were ordered to take quinine to protect themselves against malaria but, because of its bitter taste, they were reluctant to do so. The army, therefore, added it to their gin ration, hence the origin of "gin and tonic" - the tonic being quinine. The modern tonic in the popular cocktail is sold as "Indian tonic" and contains quinine. Scientific chinchona breeding in Java produced a more potent quinine by increasing the content of the sulphate of quinine in the chinchona bark. Without scientific chinchona production, European colonialism would have been almost impossible in Africa, where malaria was the principal cause of death for Europeans. In the early 19th century it was not unusual for half the British troops stationed in the Gold Coast (former Ghana) to die of the disease. The medical properties of quinine, therefore, played an important role in the 19th century Scramble for Africa, which has almost always been explained in political and geopolitical terms. Smallpox Modern smallpox vaccination, where the dead virus in the vaccine stimulates smallpox antibodies, is a method of fighting smallpox which originated in Ancient China, where doctors practiced taking scabs from the sores of smallpox victims and rubbing them on small cuts in the arms of those they wanted to protect from the disease. The fundamentals of smallpox inoculation only became known in Europe in the 18th century. Over the centuries, mainland Asians and Europeans who had survived smallpox epidemics developed a certain degree of immunity to the disease. Smallpox was unknown in pre-Columbian America and in Australasia, and little known in Africa, which left those continents with no protection when the disease accompanied European colonists to those parts of the world. In 1713, visiting ships of the Dutch East India Company caused a smallpox epidemic after infected linen was sent ashore to be washed by the Company's stores at Table Bay in South Africa. According to a contemporary estimate, barely one in ten of the Hottentot population in the peninsula survived, and the disease ravaged groups far into the interior. In Australia, there were three smallpox epidemics in the 19th century which attacked the aborigines, the first of which killed an estimated one third of their population. Smallpox first crossed the Atlantic to Hispaniola in 1518-19, where it killed one third to a half of the Arawak Indian population. For the next four hundred years, smallpox played a major role in the success of European expansion in the Americas. It exterminated a large proportion of the Aztecs, and the Indians of New England, the Pampas and Brazil. At the beginning of the 17th century, the authorities in Buenos Aires asked the Spanish Crown for permission to import more black slaves because smallpox had decimated the Amerindian population. The miraculous triumphs of the Conquistadors were in no small part due to the smallpox virus. In 1700, the Checkehets were one of the more numerous of the Amerindian peoples of the Rio de la Plata grasslands. When the tribe contracted smallpox in the early part of the 18th century, it suffered near annihilation. The Checkehets never recovered as an autonomous people, and by the end of that century even their language was gone, leaving extant today only fifteen of their words and nameplates. In New England, some European colonists saw the smallpox epidemics as a heaven- sent fortune. John Winthrop, the first Governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony, noted in his diary on 22 May 1634: "For natives, they are neere all dead of small Poxe, so as the Lord hathe cleared our title to what we possess. " Smallpox was only one of the diseases European colonists brought with them to the Americas, although it caused the most devastation. The smallpox of the 1520s were followed by measles, influenza, plague, whooping cough and mumps - viruses unknown in the Americas. It has been estimated that the effect of these diseases on Mexico was greater than that of the Black Death in 14th century Europe from which the latter took two centuries to recover, even in the absence of alien rule. In 1519, Mexico had a population of 25 million. In 1608, the colonial census recorded a Mexican Indian population of just one million. In 1530, the indigenous population of Peru numbered ten million. In 1600 it was no more than Sir Hugh Thomas, in his monumental work, The Conquest of Mexico, expressed the conviction that, were it not for smallpox and other infectious diseases, the subsequent history of Spanish Colonial America would probably have been more like that of British Colonial India. The pre-Columbian civilizations would probably have survived Spanish colonization in the same way Indian civilization survived that of Britain. AIDS and Syphilis There is a curious historical parallel between syphilis and AIDS, two infectious, sexually transmitted diseases which produced widespread epidemics five hundred years apart. They both followed periods of relative laxity in sexual morals. They were both considered, by certain sections of public opinion, as being a divine punishment to man for his evil ways and unrighteous living; they both produced a change in sexual mores, and they both provoked calls for the isolation of those afflicted which, in a few rare cases, actually occurred. In 1497, the Town Council of Aberdeen, in Scotland, banished all syphilitics to the Island of Inchkeith in the Firth of Forth and, in 1511, a Fellow of Merton College, Oxford University, was sent away for having what the English at the time called the "French Pox" , what the French called the "Neapolitan Malady", the Spaniards the "French Disease", and the Germans the "Spanish Scabies". In India, where it was introduced in the 16th century by Portuguese sailors, it was called "Firanga Roga" (foreigners' disease). The origin of both diseases was attributed to a distant foreign culture. In the case of syphilis, it was claimed to have been of Amerindian origin. Syphilis raged with peculiar virulence in Europe from the early 1490s to the mid-16th century. There was a widespread epidemic outbreak in several parts of Europe only eighteen months after the return of Columbus from his first voyage in March 1493. Given the fact that only fifty sailors returned with Columbus, it would have been physically impossible for that small number to have caused such geographically widespread outbreaks, apart from the fact that the disease would only have been noticed in the secondary or tertiary stages - several years after incubation. Both syphilis and AIDS, when transmitted sexually, share the only safe means of protection against them - the condom, which was invented in the 16th century, as a protection against syphilis, by the great Italian anatomist, Gabriel Fallopius (1523-1562), who gave his name to the fallopian tubes, the existence of which he had discovered. Culture, Health and Addictive Drugs The use of hallucinogenic plants go so far back in Prehistory that, according to certain authors, the idea of God may have occurred to man under the effect of a hallucinogenic trance which revealed the existence of another world. Escape into altered states of consciousness, into sedation or excitement, has been a constant ambition everywhere in all centuries. In many cultures ritual drugs have traditionally been used in certain religious practices to help people expand their consciousness and to explore the realms of the unseen world by embarking on imaginary journeys. Such drugs have long been a potent means of magical and religious communication. The hallucinogenic drugs, used in worship, were deeply rooted in the collective culture of the social group which used them but which controlled their use. The Aztecs had 400 gods of drink and drunkenness, called the 400 rabbits, to help them escape. When they were sober, they freely discussed their hallucinations. The relatively recent secularisation of most societies has led to the abandonment of the regulated use of hallucinogenic drugs for specific religious or cultural purposes. Their modern use has become a potentially dangerous, individual adventure, undertaken mainly as a form of recreation or as a means of escape, without the imposed restraint that existed when it was sanctioned by the group. Such a practice has come to be regarded, by the modern community, as an antisocial act of negation or rejection which is both harmful to the individual and, indeed, to society itself. The 19th century Romantic movement in Europe fashioned a new view of the artist as a supremely individual person whose creative spirit was more important than strict adherence to formal rules and conduct. Absolute individual liberty, a refusal to accept any limits, a heightened examination of human personality, and an emphasis upon imagination as a gateway to transcendent experience and spiritual truth were essential characteristics of European Romanticism. Opium and hashish were lauded by the Romanticists for their hallucinogenic qualities and for their ability to facilitate the artist's exploration of his innermost self. Composition on the Death of Gérard de Nerval, a painting by French 19th century artist, Gustave Doré, appears to have been inspired by the use of opium or hashish, and Thomas de Quincey's book, Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, first published in 1822, enjoyed enormous popularity, especially among the French Romantic poets. The latters' praise of the drug as a means for the expansion and dissolution of the self made society aware of the previously hidden effects of opium, thus bringing about a change in the social perception of the drug. Opium and hashish lost their identity as ordinary household remedies (pain-killer and sedative), which had a regular place in the family medicine chest, and emerged as dangerous narcotics which posed a threat to society itself. There has been no civilization in which people have not tried to escape from normality with the help of tobacco, alcohol or mood-altering drugs. In the United States of America, there began, in the 19th century, a succession of crazes for particular escape drugs, several of them enjoying, not only brief periods of legality but also, in some cases, the moral approbation of certain community leaders before being legally banned or restricted, thus making room for the next craze. A need existed, perhaps, at the subconscious level, to discover and explore possibilities of mental escape that matched the possibilities of physical escape presented by the Far West. In the early 19th century, Americans doubled their consumption of alcohol. Later in the century, a craze developed for patent medicines with a high opiate content, which reached its peak in 1900, quadrupling the import of opium per inhabitant. In the following decade, smoking opium became the fashion until its importation was banned in 1909. When prohibition of alcohol was imposed, cola drinks, laced with cocaine, took its place. Cocaine was declared to be the best way to escape from addiction to alcohol, opium and morphine and to be an excellent general tonic, becoming at the time the official remedy of the American Hay Fever Association. A professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and President of the American Philosophical Society even recommended cocaine as an aid to those who wished to be true and religious Americans, for it offered "an exaltation of our better mental qualities, a warmer glow of benevolence, a disposition to do great things but nobly and beneficially, a higher devotional spirit and withal a stronger self-reliance and consciousness of power. It seems to make the individual, for the time, a better and greater man". The perceived antisocial nature of the recreational use of hallucinogenic drugs, which permits users to withdraw into their own personal dream world, may well be the reason for most societies' indulgent treatment of such "social" drugs as alcohol and tobacco, which have proved to be potentially more harmful, and more addictive, than an "antisocial" drug such as cannabis. Charles Baudelaire, the 19th century French poet, in comparing wine and hashish, pointed out that wine made a person jolly and sociable while hashish tended to make him antisocial; wine fortified a person while hashish sapped his strength; wine was made for people who work while hashish was for the lazy and the idle; wine was useful for it stimulated worthwhile efforts while hashish was useless and dangerous. Baudelaire questioned, with irony, why anyone would want to work, toil, write or create when, with hashish, one could attain paradise instantly and without any effort. zo According to the WHO World Health Report 1995, smoking is the world's largest single preventable cause of illness and death. WHO estimates that there are 1.1 billion smokers in the world today, and that tobacco kills approximately three million people a year worldwide. The report further states that, in the United States of America, the risk from smoking far outweighs other dangers, with an eventual fatality rate of 50 % among those who commence smoking at twenty years and continue smoking regularly. Alcohol Since classical antiquity the chief intoxicant of Western civilization has been alcohol, which has become a permanent part of Western culture in the various forms in which it is consumed - wine, beer or hard liquor. The great demand for alcohol (hard liquor), derived from the Arab word al kohl, which reflects the Arab discovery of distilling spirits from wine, came only with the Black Death. It was believed that those who drunk it regularly would Until the 16th century, spirituous liquors never die, hence the name aqua vitae given to it. were used only as medicines, after which they escaped the control of the doctors, and began to be produced in quantity as attested by the many laws prohibiting and restricting their use. The non-alcoholic beverages - tea, coffee and chocolate - introduced into Europe in the 17th century, helped reduce the consumption of alcoholic drinks. A tradition of heavy drinking was so deeply imbedded in pre-industrial European social mores that, without the appearance of these new non-alcoholic beverages, such a tradition would not have been easily discarded to meet the demands of an industrializing society. The survival of drinking rites - drinking to someone's health, toasts, clinking glasses - are relics of pre-industrial drinking bouts where competitive drinking, to the point where participants lost consciousness, was a normal occurrence. The social consequences of alcohol abuse in 18th century Europe were widely noted in contemporary commentaries, and depicted by contemporary artists such as the English painter, William Hogarth, in his famous engraving Gin Lane and Beer Street. The effects of alcohol ("firewater") were much more dramatic, however, for the indigenous peoples in the lands colonized by Europeans. Manhattan Island was purchased by the Dutch from the Indians in 1626 for three barrels of rum. The name "Manhattan", in the language of its indigenous owners, meant "the place where we got drunk" . A 1978 WHO report described the harmful effects of modem alcohol consumption: "The addiction to drink costs the USA an estimated 25 billion dollars per year. In Britain, admissions into hospital of alcohol-related cases have increased twenty times in the last 25 years. The spread of alcohol into the Third World has been fast . . . causing one third of all road fatalities in Zambia, up to two thirds in Venezuela plus half of all cases of rape, 85% of all cases of homicide and 13% of child abuse . . . in Chile 30% of the medical budget . . . in Yugoslavia half the male admissions into hospital. Excessive drinking can have a special impact where nutrition is poor. It can lower resistance to disease, cause mental retardation, if large amounts are consumed during pregnancy, and increase the tendency to suicide. "2 Opium The poppy plant, from which opium is derived, is probably the first medicinal plant known to man. Sumerian records from as far back as 5000 BC refer to the poppy, and Assyrian tablets record its medicinal properties. The opiates from the poppy - heroin, codeine, etc. - are still among the most powerful painkilling, sleep-inducing agents known to man, but opium smoking did not begin until after the European discovery of America, where the practice of pipe smoking originated. Opium was unknown in either India or China in ancient times, and its widespread cultivation in those countries is a comparatively recent development. For much of the period since the early 19th century, Western public opinion has seen Chinese culture as an opium culture. It had only recently become so. Up to the 18th century, opium consumption in China was no more than that in Europe. Chinese addiction began with the imposition of trade in opium by the British East India Company in order to pay for British imports of Chinese tea, silk and porcelain. It has been estimated that, as a result of this imposed trade, Chinese consumption of opium increased seventy-fold, between 1767 and 1850, with serious social consequences for the country . The most common European drug in the Middle Ages was probably the poppy seed, with large areas devoted to its cultivation. It was used to make bread, restless children were given infusions of poppy to keep them quiet, and it enabled the poor to escape into a dreamlike condition. In Europe, opium became the fashionable way to escape from pain and boredom after the Swiss doctor, Paracelus (1493-1541), mixed it with alcohol to produce Laudanum. In 1854, a standard English medical text book stated that opium was "undoubtedly the most important and valued remedy in the whole materia medica to be used for maladies of everyday occurrence" though smoking it was judged "dangerous for the physical and moral character, especially of the lower classes" . Abuse of drugs such as opium can lead to physical dependence on them or drug addiction, with serious social consequences. Various methods of treatment, including the use of substitute chemical drugs such as methadone, have proved to be only partially successful. The traditional healers of Malaysia use infusions of various plants in the management of drug addiction. One such infusion, an extract of bush mengkudu, the fruit of the morinda tree, has been shown to have a general sedative effect and to alleviate withdrawal pain in drug-addicts treated with it . Cannabis The medical properties of cannabis (cannabis indica), known also as Indian hemp and marijuana, were described for the first time in the world's first Pharmacopoeia, the Pen Tsao Ching, around 2700 BC, by the Chinese Emperor, Chi'en Nung, and has been used as a folk medicine in China, India and the Middle East for several thousand years, as well as for recreational and religious purposes. In India, its psychoactive properties were much celebrated in religious rituals. In the original Hebrew text of the Old Testament, God directed Moses to make a holy oil compound of "Myrrh, sweet cinnamon, kanehbosm and cassia" (Exodus 30:23). According to a leading biblical scholar, the kanehbosm is almost certainly derived from the Sanskrit cana, meaning either reed or hemp, and bosm meaning sweet, and may well be the root for cannabis . Although cannabis (cannabis sativa) had been cultivated in Europe and North America for fibre production for centuries, neither its intoxicant nor its medicinal properties were generally known in the West until the 19th century when it was introduced from India, to those parts of the world, as a medicament. The use of cannabis derivatives for medicinal purposes spread rapidly throughout Western medicine, where it was successfully employed in the treatment of several ailments, but especially as a sedative and hypnotic. Between 1840 and 1900, European and American medical journals published more than 100 articles on the therapeutic use of the drug. In 1890, the Physician in Ordinary to Queen Victoria and President of the British Royal College of Physicians, wrote on the basis of thirty years of clinical experience of the drug: "Indian hemp, when pure and administered carefully, is one of the most valuable medicines we possess", recommending it, in particular, for senile insomnia, neuralgia, migraine, spasms and convulsions and spasmodic asthma . Its use declined in the West in the early 20th century because of the variability in strength of different batches of cannabis derivatives, its insolubility in water which did not allow it to be injected, and because alternatives became available such as injectable opiates and, later, synthetic drugs. Up to 1946, however, it was still available in pharmacies in France and, in the 1960s, extracts of cannabis could still be legally prescribed in England. Subsequently, the explosive growth, throughout North America, Western Europe and other parts of the world, of the use of cannabis for recreational purposes, led to a worldwide, legal ban on its use, even for medical purposes. Current growing interest, in the medical properties of cannabis is evidenced by a recent article on the subject in the Journal of the American Medical Association , which lists its effectiveness in the treatment of several ailments, including glaucoma, which is responsible for 14% of all cases of blindness. The cannabis plant can be grown both for fibre and seed as well as for its intoxicating and medical qualities. Agricultural hemp contains less than 3 % of the hallucinogenic agent found in Indian hemp, and smoking it would have no greater effect than smoking hay. The economic potential of agricultural hemp far outweighs its medical potential, but its great value as a fibre has been obscured, ignored and even forgotten in the wake of the general condemnation of Indian hemp because of the latter's hallucinogenic properties. In Chinese culture, hemp was the original textile fibre - the first in the world. The 1st century AD Roman writer, Pliny the Elder, stated: "Besides the use formerly made of hemp, for cloth, thread and cordage, it was the material of great other works, for which there was a very great demand, such as fishing lines and nets, hunting nets and gins... " . The strong, durable, waterproof fibres of agricultural hemp makes it the best known source of cordage fibres and an excellent source of textile fibres. Its seeds can be pressed to produce an oil that is used for cooking and in industrial processes such as the manufacture of varnishes. It has a short growing season, its penetrating roots improve soil structure, it suppresses weeds, and if grown around the edge of a plot it will repel certain pests. The word "canvas" is a corruption of cannabis, from which it was formerly made. Agricultural hemp was so important to Tudor England, because of its nautical use for ropes, sails, fishing nets, etc., that in 1563 Queen Elizabeth I decreed that every farm of sixty acres or more must allocate at least one acre for hemp growing. The Tudor penalty for not growing hemp, first imposed by Henry VIII in 1533, was five golden sovereigns . 18th and 19th century local records illustrate the importance of hemp growing to the English village economy, where a tithe or tenth part of every crop went to the local vicar. The beginning of the 19th century saw the decline of English hemp growing, the increase in wheat prices, as a result of the Napoleonic wars, making the growing of grain more profitable. It had, however, been an integral part of English countrylife, economy and culture for so many centuries that the hemp plant has left its mark on local customs and place names such as Hempstead in Essex and Hempnell in South Norfolk. As late as 1900, a book on hemp stated: "The hemp plant is the most widely diversified and, commercially and industrially, the most important plant in Europe. Hemp fibre is acknowledged to be the standard fibre in the world; and, properly manipulated, it is adapted to a much wider and more diversified use than any other fibre known. The hemp plant is the most simple and the most widely adapted to cultivation in all climates, the most susceptible to the manipulations of chemical and mechanical processes, and the most universally adapted to the production of fine, strong fibres for the widest character of products, from coarse strong cordage to threads and yarns for the finest linens, lawns* and laces... " . Agricultural hemp cannot only be grown for the production of high quality cloth but also for high quality paper. Agricultural hemp is still cultivated in Italy and in France and, in the latter country, over 10,000 hectares were under cultivation in 1978 for paper and seed. Folk Medicine and Traditional Culture The natural wisdom and keen sense of observation of traditional peoples on different continents often led them to use the same natural medicines for the treatment of the same illnesses. Thus, peoples in tropical climates, on different continents, each produced popular remedies for the same disease. The various remedies for leprosy, for example, were based on extracts from the same family of plants - the Flacourtaceae (the Indian plum) . Other healers, separated from each other by thousands of kilometres, arrived at the same medicines based on very similar plants which modern botany now places in the same family. Both the Incas and the Chinese considered that the water lily had sedative and anaphrodisiac qualities. A team of Chinese experts, on a visit to Tanzania in the 1970s, found that several traditional medical remedies used in Tanzania were also used in China. Such evidence tends to demonstrate the essential wisdom of man in all cultural settings, and to negate the often explicit, and the more often tacit, assumption that certain cultures are inherently wiser than, or superior to, others. A culture's folklore is often a rich source of information on various illnesses and cures. Such knowledge, passed down from generation to generation by word of mouth, is often contained in legends, folk tales, sayings and proverbs in order to facilitate its preservation. This unscientific form of knowledge, which often appears to express superstition, or to reflect a naive explanation of natural phenomena, has often, when subjected to modern scientific examination, proved to be well-founded. Such is the case in many folk tales, for example, which tell that a particular herb must be collected in the middle of the night, or at dawn, or in a shady and damp place, or in clearly defined areas. Modern science acknowledges that the sun, the temperature, the quality of the soil, the time of day, and the stage of development of the plant all have an important effect upon the plant's metabolism and on the natural formation of active biological components. In the early morning, the leaves of stramony or the thorn-apple are much richer in alkaloids than in the evening. Certain other active substances react in the opposite way. The leaves of the foxglove or digitalis (first used in India to treat dropsy), gathered in the afternoon, have a far higher glucose content than those gathered in the morning. Also, plants growing in shady areas contain far more alkaloids. The directions given in folklore have often proved, in scientific studies, to coincide with the conditions necessary for the extraction of the greatest quantity of the plants' active substances . The medical remedies of ancient and traditional peoples have proved, and are continuing to prove, a rich source of knowledge for modem medicine. In Quebec, Jacques Cartier, the French explorer, successfully fought scurvy in 1536-37 by using Amerindian remedies - the bark and leaves of the white cedar tree. Among the drugs adopted by the West from traditional Chinese medicine are rhubarb, castor oil, camphor, croton oil and ephedrine, the last being the active substance of the Chinese herb muhuang (ephedra), which has greatly improved the Western treatment of asthma and similar conditions, and which had been employed in Chinese medicine for at least five thousand years. Chaulmoogra oil, extracted from the seeds of trees of the Flacourtiaceae family, was used by the Chinese to treat leprosy from at least the 14th century. In the latter part of the 19th century it began to be used for this purpose by Western physicians and, until the 1940s remained, with its derivatives, the only drugs available to treat this disease. Modem study of analgesia by acupuncture, also, has brought a new understanding of the mechanism of pain control. A number of Western doctors are adding acupuncture to their therapeutic methods because it is safe, it works well for certain problems, and it is an alternative to treatment by some types of medication that have undesirable side effects. Plastic surgery was highly developed in Ancient India. During the 19th century the Germans translated from the Sushruta Samhita details of an operation for repair of damaged noses and ears. This operation, which now appears in modem text books as the pedicle graft, led to the development of plastic surgery as an independent speciality and, today, Sushruta is regarded by plastic surgeons around the world as the father of their craft . A fragment of Indica, a report of a 3rd century Greek who travelled down the Ganges river, stated: "[The physicians] know how to make women fertile and how these can give birth to boys or girls, by employing drugs. They heal diseases usually by ordering suitable foods and not by use of medicines. Mostly they employ drugs as cataplasms or by rubbing [them] into the skin because other means are not free of undesirable effects. " Traditional Tibetan psychiatry, the basic tenets of which are at least 1000 years old, is remarkably "modern" in its approach. It takes into account the psychological causes of mental illness, both operating by themselves and in conjunction with biological, behavioral, environmental and spiritual factors. An understanding of psychological causes and motivation related to insanity did not emerge in Western psychology until the 18th century . When a German botanist landed on one of the Molucca islands in the Malay Archipelago in 1742, the inhabitants told him of the medical properties of a small tree, Ochrosia. More than two centuries later, extracts from Ochrosia appear to offer hope of beneficial results in the treatment of certain types of cancer . The alkaloid, emetine, was derived from the roots of ipecacuanha, a small herb found in the undergrowth of the virgin forest of the Mato Grosso in the Amazon region, which is an important remedy for amoebic dysentery. Its discovery was sparked off by observation of the use made of the herb by the local Amerindians. Modem China has developed an obtained from wormwood, a plant which 1000 years ago, as being effective in the anti-malarial drug, Ching Hao Su, a substance ancient Chinese medical records lists, more than treatment of malaria. The snakeroot, Rauwolfia Serpentina, has been a folk remedy, used in India for centuries, in the treatment of mental disease and insomnia. Its potential as a drug was not taken seriously by modern medicine until 1952 when its active ingredient, an alkaloid named reserpine, was discovered to produce profound and prolonged tranquilizing action and to be effective in treating a variety of psychiatric disorders as well as hypertension. The old Ayurvedic remedy for mental illness was thus responsible for the development of the first major tranquilizer, ushering in a whole new era of psychiatric treatment - psychopharmacology which revolutionized the care and treatment of the mentally ill. The significance of this contribution could be appreciated by the fact that, prior to it, mentally ill people had been kept in padded cells and straight-jackets. In earlier times, yet, they were kept in chains and cages and were horribly abused. Bedlam, the popular name for the Bethlehem Royal Hospital, the first asylum for the insane in England, which had been given by Henry VIII to the city of London, in 1547, as a hospital for the insane, became infamous for the brutal ill-treatment meted out to its inmates. It was a regular Sunday pastime for Londoners to go to the hospital to taunt, mock at, beat and provoke the inmates by creating as much noise as possible, hence the modern meaning of 'noisy uproar' given to the word bedlam. Work by Nigerian and Ghanaian researchers on the fruit of a local plant, xylopia aethiopica, the dried fruits of which are used in many parts of Africa in folk medical preparations, including traditional obstetrics, have revealed antimicrobial properties which are effective against certain bacteria, and against a particular yeast which is a common agent in vaginal infections . Modem medicine has also profited from traditional beauty-enhancing techniques. The juice of the belladonna plant (Atropa belladonna), which means "beautiful lady" in Italian, was used by women in centuries past to dilate, or widen the pupils of the eyes, a sign of beauty in those times. The active principle, atropine, is employed in modem medicine as a pupil dilator. The Jivaro Indians of the Amazonian jungle, who had already given the world quinine more than three centuries ago, and had also taught the world to use curare as an anesthetic and which is now used as a muscle relaxant in modem surgery, currently use more than one thousand plants for their medical preparations. It has been discovered that the knowledge of the medicinal properties of these plants rests with the older women of the tribe. Research programmes have been undertaken by North American teams to gather the plants and to tap the wisdom of the Jivaro women. One of the plants so far tested is Uruchunumi - a plant that appears to stop bleeding almost instantly. The Jivaro women use it for bleeding gums, and some Peruvian doctors have, it is reported, recommended it for ulcers . The value of folk medical knowledge in traditional societies is gaining increasing recognition in the West, which has led ethno-botanists to now spend as much time gathering this knowledge as they spend gathering the plants themselves. A number of new drug entities are being introduced into modern medicine as a result of research into traditional folk remedies. It has been estimated that, if traditional practitioners were consulted, instead of research being based only on random screening, the rate of discovery of pharmacologically- active ingredients would be increased from much less than one per cent to forty per cent . Although traditional medical knowledge is more prevalent and more recognized in developing countries, which has resulted in it being increasingly sought there by research teams from the North, it is also being rediscovered in the developed countries. Western doctors are rediscovering a medical treatment first identified by surgeons treating casualties from the Napoleonic wars - the healing power of maggots. Doctors in Britain and in the United States of America are preparing to use the larvae of greenbottle flies to clean out dead tissue and foreign bodies from the wounds of hospital patients. Medical tests have shown that the use of maggots, in such cases, is a most effective treatment, requiring no anesthetic and leaving less scarring than conventional surgery. In England, the maggots are being bred for surgeons by zoologists at Oxford University. The treatment was first noticed on battlefields during the Napoleonic wars. Injured servicemen, left unattended for several days, were found to have higher survival rates if their wounds had been infested by maggots. At a meeting of the European Tissue Repair Society in January 1995, a medical paper on the technique of using maggots was delivered by an American specialist from California, who had used maggots on more than one hundred patients. Among the latter was a 73 year old patient who had undergone five months of successful maggot treatment for diabetes-induced gangrene of the leg. In recent years, the pace of modernization of health care in some developing countries has slackened, and the increase in recourse to traditional medicine has grown, largely because of the galloping costs of modern medicine, of which medical drugs are an important factor. A survey carried out in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, in the early 1970s, showed that the city, despite the existence of modern facilities, still had some seven hundred full-time traditional medical practitioners . Recourse to traditional medicine has also increased in Côte d'Ivoire and other Francophone African countries, following the one hundred per cent devaluation of the French West African Franc in 1994. In Western societies, more and more people are beginning to adopt health techniques and practices which have traditionally played an important role in the health systems of older civilizations, such as diet, exercise and meditation. Hippocrates, who had noted the effect of food on good health, laid much stress on diet. In Ayurveda, dietetic treatment was considered to be of great importance, and it preceded any medicinal treatment. An old Indian proverb states: "You do not need medicine if your diet is right, and it is not medicine you need when your diet is wrong". Medicinal plants, Culture and Health Care Most folk medicine, throughout history's different civilizations, has been derived from plants. It is probable that human beings, as soon as they reached the stage of reasoning, discovered, by the process of trial and error, which plants might be used as foods, which of them were poisonous and which had medicinal value. Over 4000 years ago, Chinese Emperor, Chi'en Nung, compiled a book of medicinal plants called Pen Tsao Ching which contained descriptions of more than three hundred medical plants, several of which are still used in medicine. As early as the Warring States period (475-221 BC) herbal medicine began to develop as an independent branch of Chinese medical science. The first great Indian physician known, Charaka, who practiced about 1000 BC, recorded some five hundred medicinal plants, and Sushruta, another famous Indian physician, recorded seven hundred and sixty medicinal plants in the 5th century AD. In the Middle Ages, Islamic scholars made a great contribution to the study of botany and, in particular, of medicinal plants, and al-Dinawari's six-volume "Book of Plants", compiled in the 9th century, was considered to be of outstanding importance. It combined a philological, historical and botanical approach to the study of plants, the medicinal properties of which he detailed. Another Islamic scholar, al-Biruni (973-1048), listed in his "Book of Drugs" some 850 drugs of every conceivable origin, giving their names in several languages. Avicenna, the great Islamic physician-philosopher-scientist, produced his Treatise on Cardiac Drugs in the 1lth century, in which the evaluation of many of the sixty- four drugs mentioned, based on medicinal plants, closely resemble the assessment made by modern scientists. Little has changed, for example in the scientific assessment of the medicinal properties of the damask rose (Rosa Damascena) which he had described in his Treatise . The tremendous progress made by Islamic scientists in the use of medicinal plants led to the opening of the first licensed apothecary shops in the world, in 9th century Baghdad. A list of medicinal plants and the use to which they had been put in pre-Columbian Mexico, were recorded in the Codex Barberini which was compiled in 1552, in the Náhuatl language, by Martin de la Cruz, a Mexican Indian doctor. It was later translated into Latin by another Indian before finding its way to Spain where it was acquired by the papal nuncio, Cardinal Francesco Barberini (hence the name of the book), and then passed later into the possession of the Vatican Library . Phytotherapy, the treatment of illness by pharmaceutical preparations based on vegetable drugs, was the basis of all medical treatment until the mid-19th century. This practice was gradually replaced in Europe by the use of medicines, produced from the active ingredients of medicinal plants, which had a more specific or precise pharmacological activity. This was a turning point in the attitude to medicinal plants, marking a change in the traditional approach to nature which increasingly came to be regarded as a vast source of readily available raw material to be exploited, and even over-exploited, for man's sole benefit. At first, only the active ingredients of medical plants were sought, with the rest of the plant being discarded. Then, when chemists succeeded in artificially reproducing a specific active substance, there was no further need for the plant from which it was originally obtained. The essentially reductionist and atomistic nature of modern science which, in the West, has led to a separation of Man from Nature and to an exploitative approach to the latter, as compared with the holistic outlook of the majority of other cultures in which man is regarded as being part of Nature, has frequently been attributed to the cultural/religious roots of Western civilization: "And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth. " (Genesis 1:28). In a complex system, like that of Nature, the whole must, necessarily, be more than the sum of its components. Thus Nature's action is not the sum of what is carried out simultaneously by all its parts, but the consequence of the many interactions between them. If this principle is applied to medicinal plants, the composition of which is invariably complex, it would confirm traditional theories according to which a plant, in its entirety, has properties which differ from those of its constituent parts. In traditional Tibetan herbal medicine, for example, it is not so much the presence of one particular ingredient but the combination of many ingredients that provides the desired therapeutic effect. Experiments with the artichoke, which is useful in assisting the functioning of the liver, tends to confirm the above theory. The medicinal property involved was initially attributed to a single substance, and then it was discovered that a number of other substances were also partially responsible. Yet, when these other substances were tested, it was revealed that the majority of them, in isolation, proved to be totally inactive. They were active only in conjunction with one another, and it was found that the greater the number of substances involved, the more pronounced was their activity . Furthermore, recent research has shown that some of the biological components, apart from the primary active substance, contained in a great many medicinal plants react on the biosynthesis of proteins in such a way as to produce effects different from those produced by the primary substance. This is why the effects of numerous plants like belladonna, garlic, coffee and others are different from the therapeutic effects of the chemical products extracted from those very plants, such as atropine, hypercin and caffeine . The results of this research not only validates the inherent wisdom of the traditional use of medicinal plants, but also suggest the need for a changed approach to the modern study of medicinal plants. This development coincides with a rapidly growing, modern scientific interest in medicinal plants and in traditional medicines, one of the reasons for which is the recognition, in the pharmaceutical industry, that the destruction of tropical rainforests is leading to the extinction of plants that could be potentially lucrative for it. At least twenty-five per cent of all prescription drugs currently sold contain some plant element. Until the advent of biotechnology, only seven major drugs could be synthesized more cheaply than the cost of obtaining their natural counterparts. The pharmaceutical industry has an annual turnover of $200 billion, and since the origin of perhaps half of all modern medicines can be traced to plants, the economic potential of future plant-based discoveries is enormous. Tropical America accounts for over half of the estimated closed tropical forest in the world, with Brazil being the single richest country in overall species diversity, the second richest country being Colombia, home to approximately ten per cent of the Earth's species of terrestrial plants and animals. One estimate suggests that there are some 120,000 different species of plant life in Brazil, extracts of which have been used throughout the ages by indigenous Indians as medicines and as arrow poisons for hunting. The first methodical description of plants used for medicinal purposes by the indigenous peoples of Brazil was undertaken by a scientific expedition to the North East of the country during the period 1630- 1654. Another mission, undertaken in 1847, analyzed over six thousand plants, the results of which were published in some one hundred and fifty scientific papers . Nepal is also exceptionally rich in medicinal plants and herbs, and has one of the oldest traditions of herbal medicine in the world. Nepal's rich resources of plant life is due to its geography. With some parts of the country only fifty metres above sea level and others rising to over 8000 metres, this produces a range of climatic conditions (tropical, sub- tropical, temperate and alpine) which is responsible for the rich diversity of vegetation. The attempts made by Northern pharmaceutical companies and laboratories to collect both tropical medicinal plants, as well as the knowledge of the use made of them by the local peoples, should be carried out on terms based on genuine respect for the latter, and which would acknowledge the legal rights of local peoples to their own intellectual property as well as to the material possession of the plants they and their ancestors have used, and lived with, from time immemorial. The Modern Culture of Drugs Modern pharmaceutical drugs, produced in huge quantities on a constantly growing scale, both create and satisfy a demand, in developed countries, for "convenience medicines" by people brought up in a "pill" culture of tranquillizers, many of whom are basically healthy individuals. The vast range of pharmaceutical products on sale in many countries, particularly those in the developing world, is not medically justified, and it stimulates an excessive demand which drains the resources of health services. The developing countries produce only ten per cent of all drugs consumed, and that production is confined to a very few countries, the others being obliged to spend a substantial portion of their health budget in pharmaceutical imports from the developed countries . In 1986, one South-East Asian country spent forty per cent of its health budget on pharmaceuticals. 25,000 registered formula drugs were found to be available, in the country, at the time - a hundred times more than would be necessary according to WHO's estimation of the number of basic drugs needed by developing countries. Approximately ninety-five per cent of the raw materials for pharmaceutical production in the country were imported, and many of them were overpriced due to transfer pricing methods. International pharmaceutical firms are alleged to be among the highest cost sellers of technology, and regularly practise excessive overpricing of their products. A 1977 report of the Organization for Economic Development and Co-operation (OECD) stated that certain pharmaceutical ingredients were overpriced by one thousand per cent and, in some cases, by five thousand per cent. francophone countries are imported, the cost of which doubled immediately with the devaluation of the West African Franc in 1994. In 1992, before the devaluation, the cost of pharmaceutical imports by these countries was estimated at 400 million French Francs. Fully half of the ten per cent of drugs produced locally depend on imported ingredients. Since the mid- 1950s, the pharmaceutical industry has ranked first or second in profitability among most industries. Such a favourable position has been due to the increasing concentration of the industry, the patent system, transfer pricing methods and brand name promotion. A recent issue of The Economist reported $70 billion-worth of mergers and acquisitions in the past two years alone, in an industry with a yearly turnover of just $200 billion. It has been estimated that, while about nine per cent of the income from sales of pharmaceutical products by the largest companies is spent on research and development, more than twice that percentage is spent on advertising and promotion. Furthermore, the international pharmaceutical industry was estimated, in the 1980s, to allocate no more than one per cent of its research and development expenditure to Third World diseases, and there are said to be no good drug treatment for fully one half of the diseases which are specific to developing countries. Some years ago, a Government-appointed committee in India estimated that the country's basic drug requirements could be met by 116 generic drugs, a number which represented less than one per cent of the 15,000 brand drugs then available in the country . This contrasts with the little more than 1000 registered drugs available in Norway which are considered sufficient to ensure good health care for its population. The excessive number of drugs on the market in most developing countries, combined with their overpricing due to current transfer pricing methods, is partially responsible for the fact that the cost of drugs represents forty to sixty per cent of total health care expenses in developing countries, but only ten to twenty per cent in the industrialized world. Health services in developing countries have tended to follow an urban-centered, hospital-based pattern. The consumption of pharmaceuticals has, as a result followed a similar pattern, both as to the availability of a large number of registered drugs (Norway, being an exception) and as to the emphasis placed on medication in their health care systems. Such an urban-centered system, which may be relevant in mainly urban societies, cannot possibly be appropriate in the largely rural societies of developing countries. Thus, in spite of the cultural and socioeconomic differences which exist, not only between the industrialized and the developing countries, but also among the latter themselves, the health care solutions of most developing countries are, to a large extent, imitative and standardized. They also, irrationally, reflect the concept of the universalization of the pharmaceutical medical solution and of dosage recommendations, irrespective of the nutritional and health status of patients in deprived areas, when research has demonstrated that malnutrition, for example, influences the effect of medication. In many developing countries, low-cost, self-reliant and locally-available health care alternatives have largely been marginalized, or replaced, by the Western, industrial, medical model. Furthermore, simple health care solutions such as changes in diet, herbal medicines and simple massages which are as effective today, as in the past, for a large number of minor health disorders, and which enabled people in the past to retain responsibility for their less important medical needs, have been gradually excluded from local health care systems because of an assumed superiority of modern drugs for all health problems. For lack of even the simplest measures, vast numbers of the urban and rural poor die each year, in developing countries, of preventable and curable diseases, often associated with poor hygiene and sanitation, impure water supplies, malnutrition, vitamin deficiencies and chronic preventable infections. As a result, in the 1980s, the life expectancy at birth for men and women was about one third less in Africa than it was in Europe. Similarly, infant mortality in Africa was eight times greater than in Europe. It has become clear that the system of health care that is appropriate for one country is often unsuitable for another. Research has established that effective health care is related to the special circumstances of the individual country, its people, its culture, and its economic and natural resources. The principal medical problems that afflict developing countries include gastro- intestinal disorders, respiratory complaints, infections and those related to undernutrition, all of which may be the result of poverty, ignorance and poor hygiene. These are easy to identify or treat. Also prevention measures are simple and cheap, neither treatment nor prevention requiring extensive professional training, and in most cases could be dealt with adequately by the primary health care worker. In the industrialized countries, on the other hand, the diseases so prevalent in developing countries have, for the most part, been eliminated or are readily treatable. Many of the adverse environmental conditions, as well as the principal public health hazards, have been brought under control. The major health problems tend to be obesity, many cancers and most heart diseases which have much to do with lifestyle. Anorexia and bulimia, for example, are health disorders, mainly prevalent in industrialized societies, and which highlight the stark contrast between cultures of plenty and cultures of want. An Alternative Medicine In recent years, the relevance and rationality of current Western medical models have been seriously questioned in the developed countries themselves. This is accompanied by the rapidly increasing importance given to alternative and complementary medical therapies, such as acupuncture, homeopathy, hypnotherapy, naturopathy, osteopathy, reflexology, etc. All these therapies possess a diagnostic procedure, a theory to account for the origin, development and cure of sickness, an established body of practical knowledge, and a Ayurveda the ancient Indian traditional medicine, professional grouping of practitioners. which is still the health care practiced by seventy per cent of India's population, holds a special, important place in the West, among alternative medical systems, not only because of its age-old traditions, practices and techniques which have withstood the test of time, but because of the comprehensiveness and the coherence of its corpus of medical knowledge as well as its medical effectiveness. It has enjoyed a boom in the West, particularly in the United States, within the past five years. The significance of the spiritual and physical exercises of meditation and yoga is gaining increasing recognition in the West. Yoga, as a system of preventive medicine, based on a programme of physical and mental exercise, has made it possible to control, voluntarily, functions which are normally automatic. Such exercises are also being used in the rehabilitation of the paralysed, who can be taught to modify their heart rate and blood pressure at will so as to help them recover some of their lost mobility. Evaluative studies on complementary and alternative medicine have shown that it is at least as successful as conventional medicine in the short-term treatment of those health conditions it normally treats. The few studies conducted on the long-term management of such conditions usually give complementary medicine the edge on modern medicine. The important common element of theories of complementary medicine is that they encourage, and elicit, self-healing. Both homeopathic and herbal remedies are given specifically to stimulate natural recuperative processes. Symptoms do not have the same meaning in complementary as they do in conventional medicine. They are not considered as disorder manifestations which must be attacked when they appear, nor as being necessarily linked to a disorder in the particular part of the body which produces the symptom. They are, rather, guides to underlying imbalances and indicators of progress to restoring the required underlying balance, and thus good health. Furthermore, since the whole person, and not the disease itself, is the focus of treatment, there is no reason to erect barriers between mind and body. Lifestyle, cast of mind, mood, energy, posture or constitution are all considered factors, as relevant as physical signs, in arriving at a diagnosis. Because of the recognition that health care systems based on urban medical facilities had had disappointing results in developing countries, an international conference held in Alma-Ata (in the then USSR), in 1978, under the auspices of WHO, declared that primary health care, founded on basic medical care and health education, and giving priority to rural areas, was the best means of achieving WHO's aim of "Health for all by the year 2000". The Alma-Ata Declaration stated that primary health care should be "based on practical, scientifically sound and socially acceptable methods and technology made universally accessible to individuals and families in the community through their full participation and at a cost that the community and country can afford to maintain at every stage of their development. " Towards a Cultural Approach to Health Care "Traditional medicine continues to be an important part of health care in many developing countries, and various "alternative" or complementary therapies enjoy a widespread following in developed countries. Traditional medicine has not, however, been incorporated into most national health systems, and the potential of services provided by traditional practitioners is far from being fully utilized. There is a continuing need for better assessment of the benefits of alternative forms of medicine including traditional ones" . In China, health services have, in the past three decades, been characterized by decentralization and the use of personnel chosen locally. Emphasis is placed on self-reliance as well as on the involvement of everyone in the community, and the importance of preventive measures has been stressed in health campaigns. Throughout China, the value of traditional medicine is emphasized, especially in the rural areas, and all medical schools are encouraged to teach traditional medicine as part of their curriculum. Both modern and traditional doctors are said to have equal rights and status, while Chinese health services are making efforts to develop and popularize both the traditional and the Western schools of medicine, with the aim of creating a new, integrated medical science based on the synthesis of the two schools. Traditional Chinese medicine has used plants and herbs since very ancient times. More than five thousand varieties of medicinal herbs have now been cataloged in China, and their use, in conjunction with Western medical techniques, helps China to reduce its expenditure on synthetic drugs. Ayurvedic medicine is an example of a well-organized system of traditional health care, both preventive and curative, that has a long tradition behind it (originating in India 3000 years ago) and which is widely practiced in India and other parts of Asia. It is not only a system of medicine in the conventional sense of curing disease but also a way of life that teaches how to maintain and protect good health. The ancient Ayurvedic medical shastras (manuals), written or engraved on palm leaves and pieces of bamboo wood, have been handed down from generation to generation. There are an estimated 400,000 practitioners of Ayurveda as well as over two hundred Ayurvedic hospitals in India , and Ayurvedic medication is based on some 1500 medicinal plants. Most Ayurvedic practitioners work in rural areas providing health care to at least 500 million people in India alone. The Brihatrayee Ratna Award, India's most prestigious honour for outstanding work done in the field of Ayurveda, was established in 1994, and the winner is selected each year A Cultural Future for Health Care "The main ecological, social, economic and political actions required to create supportive environments include establishing healthy public policy with the involvement of all sectors; strengthening community participation and upgrading personnel skills; and reorienting health services towards prevention and health promotion" . Health has, for a long time, been the exclusive preserve of a professional class - the medical profession - and this has resulted in a situation where health issues, unlike other important policy issues, have not, normally, been the active concern of the community. It has, also, militated against the formulation of a comprehensive view of health problems at the national level and, with the possible exception of AIDS, has led to the relegation of health issues to an unimportant place on the national and international development agenda. The growing inadequacy of classical approaches to health care would indicate the need for major changes in individual, social, economic and environmental relationships, requiring a transformation of institutional structures and power relationships as well as radical shifts in value systems and lifestyle. Such changes could be stimulated by the rapid decentralization of health care management, especially in developing countries where the needs of rural areas are greatest, accompanied by the promotion of active involvement on the part of local communities, both through local non-governmental and governmental organisms. The resulting, increased participation at the community level in health care management would, inevitably, promote local self-reliance and responsibility. Developing countries should begin, or continue, the reappraisal and scientific investigation of their medical traditions with a view to contributing to their public health requirements from their own traditional, intellectual resources. Such research would also provide developing countries with the opportunity to make a contribution to world medical knowledge and progress based on their own physical (plant life) and cultural (traditional knowledge) resources. Recent plant research, for example, has revealed the existence of hitherto unsuspected biodynamics compounds that provide possibilities for medical and commercial exploitation. Research undertaken for antibacterial agents in the extracts of 44 different types of fern found in Trinidad has shown positive results in 77 % of the extracts . The success achieved in such research could stimulate confidence, on the part of developing countries, in their own resources and cultural traditions as well as in their capacity to utilize them for the development of their own public health systems, based on the growing recognition that these very traditions and practices are proving, in certain instances, more valid than some modern medical ones. In the context of the growing recognition of the value of medicinal plants, the superior richness and variety of plant life in tropical countries provide the latter with far greater potential in the above respect, and present opportunities for South-South co-operation in medical research and health care, given the recurrence both of similar genera of plants in different continents, and similar tropical illnesses.